
Are you a webmaster? Find out how to easily add Textise to your web site.

This page has been Textised!
The original page address was https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer
For sharing use http://tinyurl.com/qzcp5e5

Here are some options:

- Back to original page (in this window | in a new window)
- Convert this page to a PDF
- Print this page
- Textise Home Page (full version | text only version)
- Textise Options Page (choose font size, font colour, etc.)

Are you a webmaster? Find out how to easily add Textise to your web site.

[Image: Page semi-protected]  
Computer
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation Jump to search
For other uses, see Computer (disambiguation).

Automatic general-purpose device for performing arithmetic or logical operations
Computer
[Image: An Acer Aspire 8920 Gemstone laptop is seen displaying the Wikipedia article on laptops.]   [Image: NASA's Columbia Supercomputer.]   [Image: Intertec Superbrain.jpg]  
[Image: 2010-01-26-technikkrempel-by-RalfR-05.jpg]   [Image: Thinking Machines Connection Machine CM-5 Frostburg 2.jpg]   [Image: G5 supplying Wikipedia via Gigabit at the Lange Nacht der Wissenschaften 2006 in Dresden.JPG]  
[Image: DM IBM S360.jpg]   [Image: Acorn BBC Master Series Microcomputer.jpg]   [Image: Dell PowerEdge Servers.jpg]  
Computers and computing devices from different eras
A computer is a machine that can be instructed to carry out sequences of arithmetic or logical operations automatically via computer programming. Modern computers have the ability to follow generalized sets of operations, called programs. These programs enable computers to perform an extremely wide range of tasks. A "complete" computer including the hardware, the operating system (main software), and peripheral equipment required and used for "full" operation can be referred to as a computer system. This term may as well be used for a group of computers that are connected and work together, in particular a computer network or computer cluster.

Computers are used as control systems for a wide variety of industrial and consumer devices. This includes simple special purpose devices like microwave ovens and remote controls, factory devices such as industrial robots and computer-aided design, and also general purpose devices like personal computers and mobile devices such as smartphones. The Internet is run on computers and it connects hundreds of millions of other computers and their users.

Early computers were only conceived as calculating devices. Since ancient times, simple manual devices like the abacus aided people in doing calculations. Early in the Industrial Revolution, some mechanical devices were built to automate long tedious tasks, such as guiding patterns for looms. More sophisticated electrical machines did specialized analog calculations in the early 20th century. The first digital electronic calculating machines were developed during World War II. Following the development of transistors and integrated circuits, the speed, power and versatility of computers have been increasing dramatically ever since then.

Conventionally, a modern computer consists of at least one processing element, typically a central processing unit (CPU), and some form of memory. The processing element carries out arithmetic and logical operations, and a sequencing and control unit can change the order of operations in response to stored information. Peripheral devices include input devices (keyboards, mice, joystick, etc.), output devices (monitor screens, printers, etc.), and input/output devices that perform both functions (e.g., the 2000s-era touchscreen). Peripheral devices allow information to be retrieved from an external source and they enable the result of operations to be saved and retrieved.

Contents 

    1  Etymology 
    2  History 
        2.1  Pre-20th century 
        2.2  First computing device 
        2.3  Analog computers 
        2.4  Digital computers 
            2.4.1  Electromechanical 
            2.4.2  Vacuum tubes and digital electronic circuits 
        2.5  Modern computers 
            2.5.1  Concept of modern computer 
            2.5.2  Stored programs 
            2.5.3  Transistors 
            2.5.4  Integrated circuits 
        2.6  Mobile computers 
    3  Types 
        3.1  Based on uses 
        3.2  Based on sizes 
    4  Hardware 
        4.1  History of computing hardware 
        4.2  Other hardware topics 
        4.3  Input devices 
        4.4  Output devices 
        4.5  Control unit 
        4.6  Central processing unit (CPU) 
        4.7  Arithmetic logic unit (ALU) 
        4.8  Memory 
        4.9  Input/output (I/O) 
        4.10  Multitasking 
        4.11  Multiprocessing 
    5  Software 
        5.1  Languages 
        5.2  Programs 
            5.2.1  Stored program architecture 
            5.2.2  Machine code 
            5.2.3  Programming language 
                5.2.3.1  Low-level languages 
                5.2.3.2  High-level languages 
            5.2.4  Program design 
            5.2.5  Bugs 
    6  Networking and the Internet 
    7  Unconventional computers 
    8  Future 
        8.1  Computer architecture paradigms 
        8.2  Artificial intelligence 
    9  Professions and organizations 
    10  See also 
    11  References 
    12  Notes 
    13  External links 

Etymology 
[Image: A human computer.]  
A female computer, with microscope and calculator, 1952
According to the Oxford English Dictionary, the first known use of the word "computer" was in 1613 in a book called The Yong Mans Gleanings by English writer Richard Braithwait: "I haue [sic] read the truest computer of Times, and the best Arithmetician that euer [sic] breathed, and he reduceth thy dayes into a short number." This usage of the term referred to a human computer, a person who carried out calculations or computations. The word continued with the same meaning until the middle of the 20th century. During the latter part of this period women were often hired as computers because they could be paid less than their male counterparts.[1] By 1943, most human computers were women.[2]

The Online Etymology Dictionary gives the first attested use of "computer" in the 1640s, meaning "one who calculates"; this is an "agent noun from compute (v.)". The Online Etymology Dictionary states that the use of the term to mean " 'calculating machine' (of any type) is from 1897." The Online Etymology Dictionary indicates that the "modern use" of the term, to mean "programmable digital electronic computer" dates from "1945 under this name; [in a] theoretical [sense] from 1937, as Turing machine".[3]

History 
Main article: History of computing hardware
Pre-20th century 
The Ishango bone
Devices have been used to aid computation for thousands of years, mostly using one-to-one correspondence with fingers. The earliest counting device was probably a form of tally stick. Later record keeping aids throughout the Fertile Crescent included calculi (clay spheres, cones, etc.) which represented counts of items, probably livestock or grains, sealed in hollow unbaked clay containers.[4][5] The use of counting rods is one example.

The Chinese Suanpan (算盘) (the number represented on this abacus is 6,302,715,408)
The abacus was initially used for arithmetic tasks. The Roman abacus was developed from devices used in Babylonia as early as 2400 BC. Since then, many other forms of reckoning boards or tables have been invented. In a medieval European counting house, a checkered cloth would be placed on a table, and markers moved around on it according to certain rules, as an aid to calculating sums of money.

[Image: The Antikythera mechanism.]  
The ancient Greek-designed Antikythera mechanism, dating between 150 and 100 BC, is the world's oldest analog computer.
The Antikythera mechanism is believed to be the earliest mechanical analog "computer", according to Derek J. de Solla Price.[6] It was designed to calculate astronomical positions. It was discovered in 1901 in the Antikythera wreck off the Greek island of Antikythera, between Kythera and Crete, and has been dated to c. 100 BC . Devices of a level of complexity comparable to that of the Antikythera mechanism would not reappear until a thousand years later.

Many mechanical aids to calculation and measurement were constructed for astronomical and navigation use. The planisphere was a star chart invented by Abū Rayhān al-Bīrūnī in the early 11th century.[7] The astrolabe was invented in the Hellenistic world in either the 1st or 2nd centuries BC and is often attributed to Hipparchus. A combination of the planisphere and dioptra, the astrolabe was effectively an analog computer capable of working out several different kinds of problems in spherical astronomy. An astrolabe incorporating a mechanical calendar computer[8][9] and gear-wheels was invented by Abi Bakr of Isfahan, Persia in 1235.[10] Abū Rayhān al-Bīrūnī invented the first mechanical geared lunisolar calendar astrolabe,[11] an early fixed-wired knowledge processing machine[12] with a gear train and gear-wheels,[13] c. 1000 AD .

The sector, a calculating instrument used for solving problems in proportion, trigonometry, multiplication and division, and for various functions, such as squares and cube roots, was developed in the late 16th century and found application in gunnery, surveying and navigation.

The planimeter was a manual instrument to calculate the area of a closed figure by tracing over it with a mechanical linkage.

A slide rule
The slide rule was invented around 1620–1630, shortly after the publication of the concept of the logarithm. It is a hand-operated analog computer for doing multiplication and division. As slide rule development progressed, added scales provided reciprocals, squares and square roots, cubes and cube roots, as well as transcendental functions such as logarithms and exponentials, circular and hyperbolic trigonometry and other functions. Slide rules with special scales are still used for quick performance of routine calculations, such as the E6B circular slide rule used for time and distance calculations on light aircraft.

In the 1770s, Pierre Jaquet-Droz, a Swiss watchmaker, built a mechanical doll (automaton) that could write holding a quill pen. By switching the number and order of its internal wheels different letters, and hence different messages, could be produced. In effect, it could be mechanically "programmed" to read instructions. Along with two other complex machines, the doll is at the Musée d'Art et d'Histoire of Neuch'tel, Switzerland, and still operates.[14]

The tide-predicting machine invented by Sir William Thomson in 1872 was of great utility to navigation in shallow waters. It used a system of pulleys and wires to automatically calculate predicted tide levels for a set period at a particular location.

The differential analyser, a mechanical analog computer designed to solve differential equations by integration, used wheel-and-disc mechanisms to perform the integration. In 1876, Lord Kelvin had already discussed the possible construction of such calculators, but he had been stymied by the limited output torque of the ball-and-disk integrators.[15] In a differential analyzer, the output of one integrator drove the input of the next integrator, or a graphing output. The torque amplifier was the advance that allowed these machines to work. Starting in the 1920s, Vannevar Bush and others developed mechanical differential analyzers.

First computing device 
A portion of Babbage's Difference engine.
Charles Babbage, an English mechanical engineer and polymath, originated the concept of a programmable computer. Considered the "father of the computer",[16] he conceptualized and invented the first mechanical computer in the early 19th century. After working on his revolutionary difference engine, designed to aid in navigational calculations, in 1833 he realized that a much more general design, an Analytical Engine, was possible. The input of programs and data was to be provided to the machine via punched cards, a method being used at the time to direct mechanical looms such as the Jacquard loom. For output, the machine would have a printer, a curve plotter and a bell. The machine would also be able to punch numbers onto cards to be read in later. The Engine incorporated an arithmetic logic unit, control flow in the form of conditional branching and loops, and integrated memory, making it the first design for a general-purpose computer that could be described in modern terms as Turing-complete.[17][18]

The machine was about a century ahead of its time. All the parts for his machine had to be made by hand – this was a major problem for a device with thousands of parts. Eventually, the project was dissolved with the decision of the British Government to cease funding. Babbage's failure to complete the analytical engine can be chiefly attributed to political and financial difficulties as well as his desire to develop an increasingly sophisticated computer and to move ahead faster than anyone else could follow. Nevertheless, his son, Henry Babbage, completed a simplified version of the analytical engine's computing unit (the mill) in 1888. He gave a successful demonstration of its use in computing tables in 1906.

Analog computers 
Main article: Analog computer
Sir William Thomson's third tide-predicting machine design, 1879–81
During the first half of the 20th century, many scientific computing needs were met by increasingly sophisticated analog computers, which used a direct mechanical or electrical model of the problem as a basis for computation. However, these were not programmable and generally lacked the versatility and accuracy of modern digital computers.[19] The first modern analog computer was a tide-predicting machine, invented by Sir William Thomson in 1872. The differential analyser, a mechanical analog computer designed to solve differential equations by integration using wheel-and-disc mechanisms, was conceptualized in 1876 by James Thomson, the brother of the more famous Lord Kelvin.[15]

The art of mechanical analog computing reached its zenith with the differential analyzer, built by H. L. Hazen and Vannevar Bush at MIT starting in 1927. This built on the mechanical integrators of James Thomson and the torque amplifiers invented by H. W. Nieman. A dozen of these devices were built before their obsolescence became obvious. By the 1950s, the success of digital electronic computers had spelled the end for most analog computing machines, but analog computers remained in use during the 1950s in some specialized applications such as education (control systems) and aircraft (slide rule).

Digital computers 
It has been suggested that this section be split out into another article titled Digital computer. (Discuss) (May 2017)
Electromechanical 
By 1938, the United States Navy had developed an electromechanical analog computer small enough to use aboard a submarine. This was the Torpedo Data Computer, which used trigonometry to solve the problem of firing a torpedo at a moving target. During World War II similar devices were developed in other countries as well.

Replica of Zuse's Z3, the first fully automatic, digital (electromechanical) computer.
Early digital computers were electromechanical; electric switches drove mechanical relays to perform the calculation. These devices had a low operating speed and were eventually superseded by much faster all-electric computers, originally using vacuum tubes. The Z2, created by German engineer Konrad Zuse in 1939, was one of the earliest examples of an electromechanical relay computer.[20]

In 1941, Zuse followed his earlier machine up with the Z3, the world's first working electromechanical programmable, fully automatic digital computer.[21][22] The Z3 was built with 2000 relays, implementing a 22 bit word length that operated at a clock frequency of about 5–10 Hz.[23] Program code was supplied on punched film while data could be stored in 64 words of memory or supplied from the keyboard. It was quite similar to modern machines in some respects, pioneering numerous advances such as floating point numbers. Rather than the harder-to-implement decimal system (used in Charles Babbage's earlier design), using a binary system meant that Zuse's machines were easier to build and potentially more reliable, given the technologies available at that time.[24] The Z3 was Turing complete.[25][26]

Vacuum tubes and digital electronic circuits 
   Purely electronic circuit elements soon replaced their mechanical and electromechanical equivalents, at the same time that digital calculation replaced analog. The engineer Tommy Flowers, working at the Post Office Research Station in London in the 1930s, began to explore the possible use of electronics for the telephone exchange. Experimental equipment that he built in 1934 went into operation five years later, converting a portion of the telephone exchange network into an electronic data processing system, using thousands of vacuum tubes.[19] In the US, John Vincent Atanasoff and Clifford E. Berry of Iowa State University developed and tested the Atanasoff–Berry Computer (ABC) in 1942,[27] the first "automatic electronic digital computer".[28] This design was also all-electronic and used about 300 vacuum tubes, with capacitors fixed in a mechanically rotating drum for memory.[29]

[Image: Two women are seen by the Colossus computer.]  
Colossus, the first electronic digital programmable computing device, was used to break German ciphers during World War II.
During World War II, the British at Bletchley Park achieved a number of successes at breaking encrypted German military communications. The German encryption machine, Enigma, was first attacked with the help of the electro-mechanical bombes which were often run by women.[30][31] To crack the more sophisticated German Lorenz SZ 40/42 machine, used for high-level Army communications, Max Newman and his colleagues commissioned Flowers to build the Colossus.[29] He spent eleven months from early February 1943 designing and building the first Colossus.[32] After a functional test in December 1943, Colossus was shipped to Bletchley Park, where it was delivered on 18 January 1944[33] and attacked its first message on 5 February.[29]

Colossus was the world's first electronic digital programmable computer.[19] It used a large number of valves (vacuum tubes). It had paper-tape input and was capable of being configured to perform a variety of boolean logical operations on its data, but it was not Turing-complete. Nine Mk II Colossi were built (The Mk I was converted to a Mk II making ten machines in total). Colossus Mark I contained 1,500 thermionic valves (tubes), but Mark II with 2,400 valves, was both 5 times faster and simpler to operate than Mark I, greatly speeding the decoding process.[34][35]

ENIAC was the first electronic, Turing-complete device, and performed ballistics trajectory calculations for the United States Army.
The ENIAC[36] (Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer) was the first electronic programmable computer built in the U.S. Although the ENIAC was similar to the Colossus, it was much faster, more flexible, and it was Turing-complete. Like the Colossus, a "program" on the ENIAC was defined by the states of its patch cables and switches, a far cry from the stored program electronic machines that came later. Once a program was written, it had to be mechanically set into the machine with manual resetting of plugs and switches. The programmers of the ENIAC were six women, often known collectively as the "ENIAC girls".[37][38]

It combined the high speed of electronics with the ability to be programmed for many complex problems. It could add or subtract 5000 times a second, a thousand times faster than any other machine. It also had modules to multiply, divide, and square root. High speed memory was limited to 20 words (about 80 bytes). Built under the direction of John Mauchly and J. Presper Eckert at the University of Pennsylvania, ENIAC's development and construction lasted from 1943 to full operation at the end of 1945. The machine was huge, weighing 30 tons, using 200 kilowatts of electric power and contained over 18,000 vacuum tubes, 1,500 relays, and hundreds of thousands of resistors, capacitors, and inductors.[39]

Modern computers  Concept of modern computer 
The principle of the modern computer was proposed by Alan Turing in his seminal 1936 paper,[40] On Computable Numbers. Turing proposed a simple device that he called "Universal Computing machine" and that is now known as a universal Turing machine. He proved that such a machine is capable of computing anything that is computable by executing instructions (program) stored on tape, allowing the machine to be programmable. The fundamental concept of Turing's design is the stored program, where all the instructions for computing are stored in memory. Von Neumann acknowledged that the central concept of the modern computer was due to this paper.[41] Turing machines are to this day a central object of study in theory of computation. Except for the limitations imposed by their finite memory stores, modern computers are said to be Turing-complete, which is to say, they have algorithm execution capability equivalent to a universal Turing machine.

Stored programs 
Main article: Stored-program computer
[Image: Three tall racks containing electronic circuit boards]  
A section of the Manchester Baby, the first electronic stored-program computer.
Early computing machines had fixed programs. Changing its function required the re-wiring and re-structuring of the machine.[29] With the proposal of the stored-program computer this changed. A stored-program computer includes by design an instruction set and can store in memory a set of instructions (a program) that details the computation. The theoretical basis for the stored-program computer was laid by Alan Turing in his 1936 paper. In 1945, Turing joined the National Physical Laboratory and began work on developing an electronic stored-program digital computer. His 1945 report "Proposed Electronic Calculator" was the first specification for such a device. John von Neumann at the University of Pennsylvania also circulated his First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC in 1945.[19]

The Manchester Baby was the world's first stored-program computer. It was built at the Victoria University of Manchester by Frederic C. Williams, Tom Kilburn and Geoff Tootill, and ran its first program on 21 June 1948.[42] It was designed as a testbed for the Williams tube, the first random-access digital storage device.[43] Although the computer was considered "small and primitive" by the standards of its time, it was the first working machine to contain all of the elements essential to a modern electronic computer.[44] As soon as the Baby had demonstrated the feasibility of its design, a project was initiated at the university to develop it into a more usable computer, the Manchester Mark 1. Grace Hopper was the first person to develop a compiler for programming language.[2]

The Mark 1 in turn quickly became the prototype for the Ferranti Mark 1, the world's first commercially available general-purpose computer.[45] Built by Ferranti, it was delivered to the University of Manchester in February 1951. At least seven of these later machines were delivered between 1953 and 1957, one of them to Shell labs in Amsterdam.[46] In October 1947, the directors of British catering company J. Lyons & Company decided to take an active role in promoting the commercial development of computers. The LEO I computer became operational in April 1951[47] and ran the world's first regular routine office computer job.

Transistors 
Main articles: Transistor, History of the transistor, and Transistor computer
Further information: MOSFET
A bipolar junction transistor.
The concept of a transistor was proposed by Julius Edgar Lilienfeld in 1925. William Shockley, John Bardeen and Walter Brattain at Bell Labs invented the first practical transistor, the point-contact transistor, in 1947, followed by the bipolar junction transistor in 1948.[48][49] From 1955 onwards, transistors replaced vacuum tubes in computer designs, giving rise to the "second generation" of computers. Compared to vacuum tubes, transistors have many advantages: they are smaller, and require less power than vacuum tubes, so give off less heat. Silicon junction transistors were much more reliable than vacuum tubes and had longer, indefinite, service life. Transistorized computers could contain tens of thousands of binary logic circuits in a relatively compact space.

At the University of Manchester, a team under the leadership of Tom Kilburn designed and built a machine using the newly developed transistors instead of valves.[50] Their first transistorised computer and the first in the world, was operational by 1953, and a second version was completed there in April 1955. However, the machine did make use of valves to generate its 125 kHz clock waveforms and in the circuitry to read and write on its magnetic drum memory, so it was not the first completely transistorized computer. That distinction goes to the Harwell CADET of 1955,[51] built by the electronics division of the Atomic Energy Research Establishment at Harwell.[51][52]

MOSFET, showing gate (G), body (B), source (S) and drain (D) terminals. The gate is separated from the body by an insulating layer (pink).
The metal–oxide–semiconductor field-effect transistor (MOSFET), also known as the MOS transistor, was invented by Mohamed Atalla and Dawon Kahng at Bell Labs in 1959.[53][54] With its high scalability,[55] and much lower power consumption and higher density than bipolar junction transistors,[56] the MOSFET made it possible to build high-density integrated circuits.[57][58] The MOSFET is the most widely used transistor in computers,[59][60] and has been the fundamental building block of digital electronics since the late 20th century.[61]

Integrated circuits 
Main articles: Integrated circuit and Invention of the integrated circuit
Further information: Planar process and Microprocessor
The next great advance in computing power came with the advent of the integrated circuit (IC). The idea of the integrated circuit was first conceived by a radar scientist working for the Royal Radar Establishment of the Ministry of Defence, Geoffrey W.A. Dummer. Dummer presented the first public description of an integrated circuit at the Symposium on Progress in Quality Electronic Components in Washington, D.C. on 7 May 1952.[62]

The first practical ICs were invented by Jack Kilby at Texas Instruments and Robert Noyce at Fairchild Semiconductor.[63] Kilby recorded his initial ideas concerning the integrated circuit in July 1958, successfully demonstrating the first working integrated example on 12 September 1958.[64] In his patent application of 6 February 1959, Kilby described his new device as "a body of semiconductor material ... wherein all the components of the electronic circuit are completely integrated".[65][66]

Noyce also came up with his own idea of an integrated circuit half a year later than Kilby.[67] His chip solved many practical problems that Kilby's had not. Produced at Fairchild Semiconductor, it was made of silicon, whereas Kilby's chip was made of germanium. The basis for Noyce's silicon IC was the planar process, developed in early 1959 by Jean Hoerni, who was in turn building on Mohamed Atalla's silicon surface passivation method developed in 1957.[68][69]

Following the invention of the MOSFET (metal-oxide-silicon field-effect transistor), also known as MOS, by Mohamed Atalla and Dawon Kahng at Bell Labs in 1959,[53] the earliest experimental MOS integrated circuit was built by Fred Heiman and Steven Hofstein at RCA in 1962.[70] General Microelectronics later introduced the first commercial MOS IC in 1964,[71] developed by Robert Norman.[70] Following the development of the self-aligned gate (silicon-gate) MOS transistor by Robert Kerwin, Donald Klein and John Sarace at Bell Labs in 1967, the first silicon-gate MOS IC with self-aligned gates was developed by Federico Faggin at Fairchild Semiconductor.[72] The MOSFET has since become the most critical device component in modern ICs.[73]

The development of the MOS integrated circuit led to the invention of the microprocessor,[74][75] and heralded an explosion in the commercial and personal use of computers. While the subject of exactly which device was the first microprocessor is contentious, partly due to lack of agreement on the exact definition of the term "microprocessor", it is largely undisputed that the first single-chip microprocessor was the Intel 4004,[76] designed and realized by Federico Faggin with his silicon-gate MOS IC technology,[74] along with Ted Hoff, Masatoshi Shima and Stanley Mazor at Intel.[77][78] In the early 1970s, MOS IC technology enabled the integration of more than 10,000 transistors on a single chip.[79]

System on a Chip (SoCs) are complete computers on a microchip (or chip) the size of a coin.[80] They may or may not have integrated RAM and flash memory. If not integrated, The RAM is usually placed directly above (known as Package on package) or below (on the opposite side of the circuit board) the SoC, and the flash memory is usually placed right next to the SoC, this all done to improve data transfer speeds, as the data signals don't have to travel long distances. Since ENIAC in 1945, computers have advanced enormously, with modern SoCs being the size of a coin while also being hundreds of thousands of times more powerful than ENIAC, integrating billions of transistors, and consuming only a few watts of power.

Mobile computers 
The first mobile computers were heavy and ran from mains power. The 50lb IBM 5100 was an early example. Later portables such as the Osborne 1 and Compaq Portable were considerably lighter but still needed to be plugged in. The first laptops, such as the Grid Compass, removed this requirement by incorporating batteries – and with the continued miniaturization of computing resources and advancements in portable battery life, portable computers grew in popularity in the 2000s.[81] The same developments allowed manufacturers to integrate computing resources into cellular mobile phones by the early 2000s.

These smartphones and tablets run on a variety of operating systems and recently became the dominant computing device on the market, with manufacturers reporting having shipped an estimated 237 million[clarification needed ] devices in 2Q 2013.[82] Mobile devices such as smartphones are powered by System on a Chip (SoCs), which are complete computers on a microchip the size of a coin.[80]

Types 
Computers are typically classified based on their uses:

Based on uses 

    Analog computer
    Digital computer
    Hybrid computer

Based on sizes 

    Smartphone
    Microcomputer
    Workstation
    Personal computer
    Laptop
    Minicomputer
    Mainframe computer
    Supercomputer
    Tablet computer

Hardware 
Main articles: Computer hardware, Personal computer hardware, Central processing unit, and Microprocessor
[Image: File:Computer Components.webm]  Play media  
Video demonstrating the standard components of a "slimline" computer
The term hardware covers all of those parts of a computer that are tangible physical objects. Circuits, computer chips, graphic cards, sound cards, memory (RAM), motherboard, displays, power supplies, cables, keyboards, printers and "mice" input devices are all hardware.

History of computing hardware 
Main article: History of computing hardware
First generation (mechanical/electromechanical) Calculators Pascal's calculator, Arithmometer, Difference engine, Quevedo's analytical machines Programmable devices Jacquard loom, Analytical engine, IBM ASCC/Harvard Mark I, Harvard Mark II, IBM SSEC, Z1, Z2, Z3 Second generation (vacuum tubes) Calculators Atanasoff–Berry Computer, IBM 604, UNIVAC 60, UNIVAC 120 Programmable devices Colossus, ENIAC, Manchester Baby, EDSAC, Manchester Mark 1, Ferranti Pegasus, Ferranti Mercury, CSIRAC, EDVAC, UNIVAC I, IBM 701, IBM 702, IBM 650, Z22 Third generation (discrete transistors and SSI, MSI, LSI integrated circuits) Mainframes IBM 7090, IBM 7080, IBM System/360, BUNCH Minicomputer HP 2116A, IBM System/32, IBM System/36, LINC, PDP-8, PDP-11 Desktop Computer Programma 101, HP 9100 Fourth generation (VLSI integrated circuits) Minicomputer VAX, IBM System i 4-bit microcomputer Intel 4004, Intel 4040 8-bit microcomputer Intel 8008, Intel 8080, Motorola 6800, Motorola 6809, MOS Technology 6502, Zilog Z80 16-bit microcomputer Intel 8088, Zilog Z8000, WDC 65816/65802 32-bit microcomputer Intel 80386, Pentium, Motorola 68000, ARM 64-bit microcomputer[83] Alpha, MIPS, PA-RISC, PowerPC, SPARC, x86-64, ARMv8-A Embedded computer Intel 8048, Intel 8051 Personal computer Desktop computer, Home computer, Laptop computer, Personal digital assistant (PDA), Portable computer, Tablet PC, Wearable computer Theoretical/experimental Quantum computer, Chemical computer, DNA computing, Optical computer, Spintronics-based computer Other hardware topics  Peripheral device (input/output) Input Mouse, keyboard, joystick, image scanner, webcam, graphics tablet, microphone Output Monitor, printer, loudspeaker Both Floppy disk drive, hard disk drive, optical disc drive, teleprinter Computer buses Short range RS-232, SCSI, PCI, USB Long range (computer networking) Ethernet, ATM, FDDI
A general purpose computer has four main components: the arithmetic logic unit (ALU), the control unit, the memory, and the input and output devices (collectively termed I/O). These parts are interconnected by buses, often made of groups of wires. Inside each of these parts are thousands to trillions of small electrical circuits which can be turned off or on by means of an electronic switch. Each circuit represents a bit (binary digit) of information so that when the circuit is on it represents a "1", and when off it represents a "0" (in positive logic representation). The circuits are arranged in logic gates so that one or more of the circuits may control the state of one or more of the other circuits.

Input devices 
When unprocessed data is sent to the computer with the help of input devices, the data is processed and sent to output devices. The input devices may be hand-operated or automated. The act of processing is mainly regulated by the CPU. Some examples of input devices are:

    Computer keyboard
    Digital camera
    Digital video
    Graphics tablet
    Image scanner
    Joystick
    Microphone
    Mouse
    Overlay keyboard
    Real-time clock
    Trackball
    Touchscreen

Output devices 
The means through which computer gives output are known as output devices. Some examples of output devices are:

    Computer monitor
    Printer
    PC speaker
    Projector
    Sound card
    Video card

Control unit 
Main articles: CPU design and Control unit
Diagram showing how a particular MIPS architecture instruction would be decoded by the control system
The control unit (often called a control system or central controller) manages the computer's various components; it reads and interprets (decodes) the program instructions, transforming them into control signals that activate other parts of the computer.[84] Control systems in advanced computers may change the order of execution of some instructions to improve performance.

A key component common to all CPUs is the program counter, a special memory cell (a register) that keeps track of which location in memory the next instruction is to be read from.[85]

The control system's function is as follows—note that this is a simplified description, and some of these steps may be performed concurrently or in a different order depending on the type of CPU:

    Read the code for the next instruction from the cell indicated by the program counter.
    Decode the numerical code for the instruction into a set of commands or signals for each of the other systems.
    Increment the program counter so it points to the next instruction.
    Read whatever data the instruction requires from cells in memory (or perhaps from an input device). The location of this required data is typically stored within the instruction code.
    Provide the necessary data to an ALU or register.
    If the instruction requires an ALU or specialized hardware to complete, instruct the hardware to perform the requested operation.
    Write the result from the ALU back to a memory location or to a register or perhaps an output device.
    Jump back to step (1).

Since the program counter is (conceptually) just another set of memory cells, it can be changed by calculations done in the ALU. Adding 100 to the program counter would cause the next instruction to be read from a place 100 locations further down the program. Instructions that modify the program counter are often known as "jumps" and allow for loops (instructions that are repeated by the computer) and often conditional instruction execution (both examples of control flow).

The sequence of operations that the control unit goes through to process an instruction is in itself like a short computer program, and indeed, in some more complex CPU designs, there is another yet smaller computer called a microsequencer, which runs a microcode program that causes all of these events to happen.

 Central processing unit (CPU) 
The control unit, ALU, and registers are collectively known as a central processing unit (CPU). Early CPUs were composed of many separate components but since the mid-1970s CPUs have typically been constructed on a single integrated circuit called a microprocessor.

 Arithmetic logic unit (ALU) 
Main article: Arithmetic logic unit
The ALU is capable of performing two classes of operations: arithmetic and logic.[86] The set of arithmetic operations that a particular ALU supports may be limited to addition and subtraction, or might include multiplication, division, trigonometry functions such as sine, cosine, etc., and square roots. Some can only operate on whole numbers (integers) while others use floating point to represent real numbers, albeit with limited precision. However, any computer that is capable of performing just the simplest operations can be programmed to break down the more complex operations into simple steps that it can perform. Therefore, any computer can be programmed to perform any arithmetic operation—although it will take more time to do so if its ALU does not directly support the operation. An ALU may also compare numbers and return boolean truth values (true or false) depending on whether one is equal to, greater than or less than the other ("is 64 greater than 65?"). Logic operations involve Boolean logic: AND, OR, XOR, and NOT. These can be useful for creating complicated conditional statements and processing boolean logic.

Superscalar computers may contain multiple ALUs, allowing them to process several instructions simultaneously.[87] Graphics processors and computers with SIMD and MIMD features often contain ALUs that can perform arithmetic on vectors and matrices.

Memory 
Main article: Computer data storage
Magnetic core memory was the computer memory of choice throughout the 1960s, until it was replaced by semiconductor memory.
A computer's memory can be viewed as a list of cells into which numbers can be placed or read. Each cell has a numbered "address" and can store a single number. The computer can be instructed to "put the number 123 into the cell numbered 1357" or to "add the number that is in cell 1357 to the number that is in cell 2468 and put the answer into cell 1595." The information stored in memory may represent practically anything. Letters, numbers, even computer instructions can be placed into memory with equal ease. Since the CPU does not differentiate between different types of information, it is the software's responsibility to give significance to what the memory sees as nothing but a series of numbers.

In almost all modern computers, each memory cell is set up to store binary numbers in groups of eight bits (called a byte). Each byte is able to represent 256 different numbers (28 = 256); either from 0 to 255 or −128 to +127. To store larger numbers, several consecutive bytes may be used (typically, two, four or eight). When negative numbers are required, they are usually stored in two's complement notation. Other arrangements are possible, but are usually not seen outside of specialized applications or historical contexts. A computer can store any kind of information in memory if it can be represented numerically. Modern computers have billions or even trillions of bytes of memory.

The CPU contains a special set of memory cells called registers that can be read and written to much more rapidly than the main memory area. There are typically between two and one hundred registers depending on the type of CPU. Registers are used for the most frequently needed data items to avoid having to access main memory every time data is needed. As data is constantly being worked on, reducing the need to access main memory (which is often slow compared to the ALU and control units) greatly increases the computer's speed.

Computer main memory comes in two principal varieties:

    random-access memory or RAM
    read-only memory or ROM

RAM can be read and written to anytime the CPU commands it, but ROM is preloaded with data and software that never changes, therefore the CPU can only read from it. ROM is typically used to store the computer's initial start-up instructions. In general, the contents of RAM are erased when the power to the computer is turned off, but ROM retains its data indefinitely. In a PC, the ROM contains a specialized program called the BIOS that orchestrates loading the computer's operating system from the hard disk drive into RAM whenever the computer is turned on or reset. In embedded computers, which frequently do not have disk drives, all of the required software may be stored in ROM. Software stored in ROM is often called firmware, because it is notionally more like hardware than software. Flash memory blurs the distinction between ROM and RAM, as it retains its data when turned off but is also rewritable. It is typically much slower than conventional ROM and RAM however, so its use is restricted to applications where high speed is unnecessary.[88]

In more sophisticated computers there may be one or more RAM cache memories, which are slower than registers but faster than main memory. Generally computers with this sort of cache are designed to move frequently needed data into the cache automatically, often without the need for any intervention on the programmer's part.

 Input/output (I/O) 
Main article: Input/output
Hard disk drives are common storage devices used with computers.
I/O is the means by which a computer exchanges information with the outside world.[89] Devices that provide input or output to the computer are called peripherals.[90] On a typical personal computer, peripherals include input devices like the keyboard and mouse, and output devices such as the display and printer. Hard disk drives, floppy disk drives and optical disc drives serve as both input and output devices. Computer networking is another form of I/O. I/O devices are often complex computers in their own right, with their own CPU and memory. A graphics processing unit might contain fifty or more tiny computers that perform the calculations necessary to display 3D graphics.[citation needed ] Modern desktop computers contain many smaller computers that assist the main CPU in performing I/O. A 2016-era flat screen display contains its own computer circuitry.

Multitasking 
Main article: Computer multitasking
While a computer may be viewed as running one gigantic program stored in its main memory, in some systems it is necessary to give the appearance of running several programs simultaneously. This is achieved by multitasking i.e. having the computer switch rapidly between running each program in turn.[91] One means by which this is done is with a special signal called an interrupt, which can periodically cause the computer to stop executing instructions where it was and do something else instead. By remembering where it was executing prior to the interrupt, the computer can return to that task later. If several programs are running "at the same time". then the interrupt generator might be causing several hundred interrupts per second, causing a program switch each time. Since modern computers typically execute instructions several orders of magnitude faster than human perception, it may appear that many programs are running at the same time even though only one is ever executing in any given instant. This method of multitasking is sometimes termed "time-sharing" since each program is allocated a "slice" of time in turn.[92]

Before the era of inexpensive computers, the principal use for multitasking was to allow many people to share the same computer. Seemingly, multitasking would cause a computer that is switching between several programs to run more slowly, in direct proportion to the number of programs it is running, but most programs spend much of their time waiting for slow input/output devices to complete their tasks. If a program is waiting for the user to click on the mouse or press a key on the keyboard, then it will not take a "time slice" until the event it is waiting for has occurred. This frees up time for other programs to execute so that many programs may be run simultaneously without unacceptable speed loss.

Multiprocessing 
Main article: Multiprocessing
Cray designed many supercomputers that used multiprocessing heavily.
Some computers are designed to distribute their work across several CPUs in a multiprocessing configuration, a technique once employed only in large and powerful machines such as supercomputers, mainframe computers and servers. Multiprocessor and multi-core (multiple CPUs on a single integrated circuit) personal and laptop computers are now widely available, and are being increasingly used in lower-end markets as a result.

Supercomputers in particular often have highly unique architectures that differ significantly from the basic stored-program architecture and from general purpose computers.[93] They often feature thousands of CPUs, customized high-speed interconnects, and specialized computing hardware. Such designs tend to be useful only for specialized tasks due to the large scale of program organization required to successfully utilize most of the available resources at once. Supercomputers usually see usage in large-scale simulation, graphics rendering, and cryptography applications, as well as with other so-called "embarrassingly parallel" tasks.

Software 
Main article: Computer software
Software refers to parts of the computer which do not have a material form, such as programs, data, protocols, etc. Software is that part of a computer system that consists of encoded information or computer instructions, in contrast to the physical hardware from which the system is built. Computer software includes computer programs, libraries and related non-executable data, such as online documentation or digital media. It is often divided into system software and application software Computer hardware and software require each other and neither can be realistically used on its own. When software is stored in hardware that cannot easily be modified, such as with BIOS ROM in an IBM PC compatible computer, it is sometimes called "firmware".

Operating system /System Software Unix and BSD UNIX System V, IBM AIX, HP-UX, Solaris (SunOS), IRIX, List of BSD operating systems GNU/Linux List of Linux distributions, Comparison of Linux distributions Microsoft Windows Windows 95, Windows 98, Windows NT, Windows 2000, Windows ME, Windows XP, Windows Vista, Windows 7, Windows 8, Windows 8.1, Windows 10 DOS 86-DOS (QDOS), IBM PC DOS, MS-DOS, DR-DOS, FreeDOS Macintosh operating systems Classic Mac OS, macOS (previously OS X and Mac OS X) Embedded and real-time List of embedded operating systems Experimental Amoeba, Oberon/Bluebottle, Plan 9 from Bell Labs Library Multimedia DirectX, OpenGL, OpenAL, Vulkan (API) Programming library C standard library, Standard Template Library Data Protocol TCP/IP, Kermit, FTP, HTTP, SMTP File format HTML, XML, JPEG, MPEG, PNG User interface Graphical user interface (WIMP) Microsoft Windows, GNOME, KDE, QNX Photon, CDE, GEM, Aqua Text-based user interface Command-line interface, Text user interface Application Software Office suite Word processing, Desktop publishing, Presentation program, Database management system, Scheduling & Time management, Spreadsheet, Accounting software Internet Access Browser, Email client, Web server, Mail transfer agent, Instant messaging Design and manufacturing Computer-aided design, Computer-aided manufacturing, Plant management, Robotic manufacturing, Supply chain management Graphics Raster graphics editor, Vector graphics editor, 3D modeler, Animation editor, 3D computer graphics, Video editing, Image processing Audio Digital audio editor, Audio playback, Mixing, Audio synthesis, Computer music Software engineering Compiler, Assembler, Interpreter, Debugger, Text editor, Integrated development environment, Software performance analysis, Revision control, Software configuration management Educational Edutainment, Educational game, Serious game, Flight simulator Games Strategy, Arcade, Puzzle, Simulation, First-person shooter, Platform, Massively multiplayer, Interactive fiction Misc Artificial intelligence, Antivirus software, Malware scanner, Installer/Package management systems, File manager Languages 
There are thousands of different programming languages—some intended to be general purpose, others useful only for highly specialized applications.

Programming languages Lists of programming languages Timeline of programming languages, List of programming languages by category, Generational list of programming languages, List of programming languages, Non-English-based programming languages Commonly used assembly languages ARM, MIPS, x86 Commonly used high-level programming languages Ada, BASIC, C, C++, C#, COBOL, Fortran, PL/I, REXX, Java, Lisp, Pascal, Object Pascal Commonly used scripting languages Bourne script, JavaScript, Python, Ruby, PHP, Perl Programs 
The defining feature of modern computers which distinguishes them from all other machines is that they can be programmed. That is to say that some type of instructions (the program) can be given to the computer, and it will process them. Modern computers based on the von Neumann architecture often have machine code in the form of an imperative programming language. In practical terms, a computer program may be just a few instructions or extend to many millions of instructions, as do the programs for word processors and web browsers for example. A typical modern computer can execute billions of instructions per second (gigaflops) and rarely makes a mistake over many years of operation. Large computer programs consisting of several million instructions may take teams of programmers years to write, and due to the complexity of the task almost certainly contain errors.

Stored program architecture 
Main articles: Computer program and Computer programming
Replica of the Manchester Baby, the world's first electronic stored-program computer, at the Museum of Science and Industry in Manchester, England
This section applies to most common RAM machine–based computers.

In most cases, computer instructions are simple: add one number to another, move some data from one location to another, send a message to some external device, etc. These instructions are read from the computer's memory and are generally carried out (executed) in the order they were given. However, there are usually specialized instructions to tell the computer to jump ahead or backwards to some other place in the program and to carry on executing from there. These are called "jump" instructions (or branches). Furthermore, jump instructions may be made to happen conditionally so that different sequences of instructions may be used depending on the result of some previous calculation or some external event. Many computers directly support subroutines by providing a type of jump that "remembers" the location it jumped from and another instruction to return to the instruction following that jump instruction.

Program execution might be likened to reading a book. While a person will normally read each word and line in sequence, they may at times jump back to an earlier place in the text or skip sections that are not of interest. Similarly, a computer may sometimes go back and repeat the instructions in some section of the program over and over again until some internal condition is met. This is called the flow of control within the program and it is what allows the computer to perform tasks repeatedly without human intervention.

Comparatively, a person using a pocket calculator can perform a basic arithmetic operation such as adding two numbers with just a few button presses. But to add together all of the numbers from 1 to 1,000 would take thousands of button presses and a lot of time, with a near certainty of making a mistake. On the other hand, a computer may be programmed to do this with just a few simple instructions. The following example is written in the MIPS assembly language:

  begin:  addi  $8 ,  $0 ,  0  # initialize sum to 0  addi  $9 ,  $0 ,  1  # set first number to add = 1  loop :  slti  $10 ,  $9 ,  1000  # check if the number is less than 1000  beq  $10 ,  $0 ,  finish  # if odd number is greater than n then exit  add  $8 ,  $8 ,  $9  # update sum  addi  $9 ,  $9 ,  1  # get next number  j  loop  # repeat the summing process  finish :  add  $2 ,  $8 ,  $0  # put sum in output register 
Once told to run this program, the computer will perform the repetitive addition task without further human intervention. It will almost never make a mistake and a modern PC can complete the task in a fraction of a second.

Machine code 
In most computers, individual instructions are stored as machine code with each instruction being given a unique number (its operation code or opcode for short). The command to add two numbers together would have one opcode; the command to multiply them would have a different opcode, and so on. The simplest computers are able to perform any of a handful of different instructions; the more complex computers have several hundred to choose from, each with a unique numerical code. Since the computer's memory is able to store numbers, it can also store the instruction codes. This leads to the important fact that entire programs (which are just lists of these instructions) can be represented as lists of numbers and can themselves be manipulated inside the computer in the same way as numeric data. The fundamental concept of storing programs in the computer's memory alongside the data they operate on is the crux of the von Neumann, or stored program[citation needed ], architecture. In some cases, a computer might store some or all of its program in memory that is kept separate from the data it operates on. This is called the Harvard architecture after the Harvard Mark I computer. Modern von Neumann computers display some traits of the Harvard architecture in their designs, such as in CPU caches.

While it is possible to write computer programs as long lists of numbers (machine language) and while this technique was used with many early computers,[94] it is extremely tedious and potentially error-prone to do so in practice, especially for complicated programs. Instead, each basic instruction can be given a short name that is indicative of its function and easy to remember – a mnemonic such as ADD, SUB, MULT or JUMP. These mnemonics are collectively known as a computer's assembly language. Converting programs written in assembly language into something the computer can actually understand (machine language) is usually done by a computer program called an assembler.

A 1970s punched card containing one line from a Fortran program. The card reads: "Z(1) = Y + W(1)" and is labeled "PROJ039" for identification purposes.
Programming language 
Main article: Programming language
Programming languages provide various ways of specifying programs for computers to run. Unlike natural languages, programming languages are designed to permit no ambiguity and to be concise. They are purely written languages and are often difficult to read aloud. They are generally either translated into machine code by a compiler or an assembler before being run, or translated directly at run time by an interpreter. Sometimes programs are executed by a hybrid method of the two techniques.

Low-level languages 
Main article: Low-level programming language
Machine languages and the assembly languages that represent them (collectively termed low-level programming languages) tend to be unique to a particular type of computer. For instance, an ARM architecture computer (such as may be found in a smartphone or a hand-held videogame) cannot understand the machine language of an x86 CPU that might be in a PC.[95]

High-level languages 
Main article: High-level programming language
Although considerably easier than in machine language, writing long programs in assembly language is often difficult and is also error prone. Therefore, most practical programs are written in more abstract high-level programming languages that are able to express the needs of the programmer more conveniently (and thereby help reduce programmer error). High level languages are usually "compiled" into machine language (or sometimes into assembly language and then into machine language) using another computer program called a compiler.[96] High level languages are less related to the workings of the target computer than assembly language, and more related to the language and structure of the problem(s) to be solved by the final program. It is therefore often possible to use different compilers to translate the same high level language program into the machine language of many different types of computer. This is part of the means by which software like video games may be made available for different computer architectures such as personal computers and various video game consoles.

Program design 
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.  (July 2012 ) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Program design of small programs is relatively simple and involves the analysis of the problem, collection of inputs, using the programming constructs within languages, devising or using established procedures and algorithms, providing data for output devices and solutions to the problem as applicable. As problems become larger and more complex, features such as subprograms, modules, formal documentation, and new paradigms such as object-oriented programming are encountered. Large programs involving thousands of line of code and more require formal software methodologies. The task of developing large software systems presents a significant intellectual challenge. Producing software with an acceptably high reliability within a predictable schedule and budget has historically been difficult; the academic and professional discipline of software engineering concentrates specifically on this challenge.

Bugs 
Main article: Software bug
The actual first computer bug, a moth found trapped on a relay of the Harvard Mark II computer
Errors in computer programs are called "bugs". They may be benign and not affect the usefulness of the program, or have only subtle effects. But in some cases, they may cause the program or the entire system to "hang", becoming unresponsive to input such as mouse clicks or keystrokes, to completely fail, or to crash. Otherwise benign bugs may sometimes be harnessed for malicious intent by an unscrupulous user writing an exploit, code designed to take advantage of a bug and disrupt a computer's proper execution. Bugs are usually not the fault of the computer. Since computers merely execute the instructions they are given, bugs are nearly always the result of programmer error or an oversight made in the program's design.[97] Admiral Grace Hopper, an American computer scientist and developer of the first compiler, is credited for having first used the term "bugs" in computing after a dead moth was found shorting a relay in the Harvard Mark II computer in September 1947.[98]

Networking and the Internet 
Main articles: Computer networking and Internet
Visualization of a portion of the routes on the Internet
Computers have been used to coordinate information between multiple locations since the 1950s. The U.S. military's SAGE system was the first large-scale example of such a system, which led to a number of special-purpose commercial systems such as Sabre.[99] In the 1970s, computer engineers at research institutions throughout the United States began to link their computers together using telecommunications technology. The effort was funded by ARPA (now DARPA), and the computer network that resulted was called the ARPANET.[100] The technologies that made the Arpanet possible spread and evolved.

In time, the network spread beyond academic and military institutions and became known as the Internet. The emergence of networking involved a redefinition of the nature and boundaries of the computer. Computer operating systems and applications were modified to include the ability to define and access the resources of other computers on the network, such as peripheral devices, stored information, and the like, as extensions of the resources of an individual computer. Initially these facilities were available primarily to people working in high-tech environments, but in the 1990s the spread of applications like e-mail and the World Wide Web, combined with the development of cheap, fast networking technologies like Ethernet and ADSL saw computer networking become almost ubiquitous. In fact, the number of computers that are networked is growing phenomenally. A very large proportion of personal computers regularly connect to the Internet to communicate and receive information. "Wireless" networking, often utilizing mobile phone networks, has meant networking is becoming increasingly ubiquitous even in mobile computing environments.

Unconventional computers 
Main article: Human computer
See also: Harvard Computers
A computer does not need to be electronic, nor even have a processor, nor RAM, nor even a hard disk. While popular usage of the word "computer" is synonymous with a personal electronic computer, the modern[101] definition of a computer is literally: "A device that computes, especially a programmable [usually] electronic machine that performs high-speed mathematical or logical operations or that assembles, stores, correlates, or otherwise processes information."[102] Any device which processes information qualifies as a computer, especially if the processing is purposeful.[citation needed ]

Future 
There is active research to make computers out of many promising new types of technology, such as optical computers, DNA computers, neural computers, and quantum computers. Most computers are universal, and are able to calculate any computable function, and are limited only by their memory capacity and operating speed. However different designs of computers can give very different performance for particular problems; for example quantum computers can potentially break some modern encryption algorithms (by quantum factoring) very quickly.

Computer architecture paradigms 
There are many types of computer architectures:

    Quantum computer vs. Chemical computer
    Scalar processor vs. Vector processor
    Non-Uniform Memory Access (NUMA) computers
    Register machine vs. Stack machine
    Harvard architecture vs. von Neumann architecture
    Cellular architecture

Of all these abstract machines, a quantum computer holds the most promise for revolutionizing computing.[103] Logic gates are a common abstraction which can apply to most of the above digital or analog paradigms. The ability to store and execute lists of instructions called programs makes computers extremely versatile, distinguishing them from calculators. The Church–Turing thesis is a mathematical statement of this versatility: any computer with a minimum capability (being Turing-complete) is, in principle, capable of performing the same tasks that any other computer can perform. Therefore, any type of computer (netbook, supercomputer, cellular automaton, etc.) is able to perform the same computational tasks, given enough time and storage capacity.

Artificial intelligence 
A computer will solve problems in exactly the way it is programmed to, without regard to efficiency, alternative solutions, possible shortcuts, or possible errors in the code. Computer programs that learn and adapt are part of the emerging field of artificial intelligence and machine learning. Artificial intelligence based products generally fall into two major categories: rule based systems and pattern recognition systems. Rule based systems attempt to represent the rules used by human experts and tend to be expensive to develop. Pattern based systems use data about a problem to generate conclusions. Examples of pattern based systems include voice recognition, font recognition, translation and the emerging field of on-line marketing.

Professions and organizations 
As the use of computers has spread throughout society, there are an increasing number of careers involving computers.

Computer-related professions Hardware-related Electrical engineering, Electronic engineering, Computer engineering, Telecommunications engineering, Optical engineering, Nanoengineering Software-related Computer science, Computer engineering, Desktop publishing, Human–computer interaction, Information technology, Information systems, Computational science, Software engineering, Video game industry, Web design
The need for computers to work well together and to be able to exchange information has spawned the need for many standards organizations, clubs and societies of both a formal and informal nature.

Organizations Standards groups ANSI, IEC, IEEE, IETF, ISO, W3C Professional societies ACM, AIS, IET, IFIP, BCS Free/open source software groups Free Software Foundation, Mozilla Foundation, Apache Software Foundation See also 

    Glossary of computers
    Computability theory
    Computer insecurity
    Computer security
    Glossary of computer hardware terms
    History of computer science
    List of computer term etymologies
    List of fictional computers
    List of pioneers in computer science
    Pulse computation
    TOP500 (list of most powerful computers)
    Unconventional computing

References 

    ^  Evans 2018, p. 23. 
    ^ a b  Smith 2013, p. 6. 
    ^  "computer (n.)". Online Etymology Dictionary.  
    ^  According to Schmandt-Besserat 1981, these clay containers contained tokens, the total of which were the count of objects being transferred. The containers thus served as something of a bill of lading or an accounts book. In order to avoid breaking open the containers, first, clay impressions of the tokens were placed on the outside of the containers, for the count; the shapes of the impressions were abstracted into stylized marks; finally, the abstract marks were systematically used as numerals; these numerals were finally formalized as numbers. Eventually (Schmandt-Besserat estimates it took 4000 years Archived 30 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine ) the marks on the outside of the containers were all that were needed to convey the count, and the clay containers evolved into clay tablets with marks for the count. 
    ^  Robson, Eleanor (2008), Mathematics in Ancient Iraq, ISBN 978-0-691-09182-2 . p. 5: calculi were in use in Iraq for primitive accounting systems as early as 3200–3000 BCE, with commodity-specific counting representation systems. Balanced accounting was in use by 3000–2350 BCE, and a sexagesimal number system was in use 2350–2000 BCE. 
    ^  The Antikythera Mechanism Research Project Archived 28 April 2008 at the Wayback Machine, The Antikythera Mechanism Research Project. Retrieved 1 July 2007. 
    ^  G. Wiet, V. Elisseeff, P. Wolff, J. Naudu (1975). History of Mankind, Vol 3: The Great medieval Civilisations, p. 649. George Allen & Unwin Ltd, UNESCO. 
    ^  Fuat Sezgin "Catalogue of the Exhibition of the Institute for the History of Arabic-Islamic Science (at the Johann Wolfgang Goethe University", Frankfurt, Germany) Frankfurt Book Fair 2004, pp. 35 & 38. 
    ^  Charette, François (2006). "Archaeology: High tech from Ancient Greece". Nature. 444 (7119): 551–552. Bibcode:2006Natur.444..551C. doi:10.1038/444551a. PMID 17136077.  
    ^  Bedini, Silvio A.; Maddison, Francis R. (1966). "Mechanical Universe: The Astrarium of Giovanni de' Dondi". Transactions of the American Philosophical Society. 56 (5): 1–69. doi:10.2307/1006002. JSTOR 1006002.  
    ^  Price, Derek de S. (1984). "A History of Calculating Machines". IEEE Micro. 4 (1): 22–52. doi:10.1109/MM.1984.291305.  
    ^  Őren, Tuncer (2001). "Advances in Computer and Information Sciences: From Abacus to Holonic Agents" (PDF) . Turk J Elec Engin. 9 (1): 63–70.  
    ^  Donald Routledge Hill (1985). "Al-Biruni's mechanical calendar", Annals of Science 42, pp. 139–163. 
    ^  "The Writer Automaton, Switzerland". chonday.com. 11 July 2013.  
    ^ a b  Ray Girvan, "The revealed grace of the mechanism: computing after Babbage" Archived 3 November 2012 at the Wayback Machine, Scientific Computing World, May/June 2003 
    ^  Halacy, Daniel Stephen (1970). Charles Babbage, Father of the Computer. Crowell-Collier Press. ISBN 978-0-02-741370-0.  
    ^  "Babbage". Online stuff. Science Museum. 19 January 2007. Retrieved 1 August  2012 .  
    ^  "Let's build Babbage's ultimate mechanical computer". opinion. New Scientist. 23 December 2010. Retrieved 1 August  2012 .  
    ^ a b c d  The Modern History of Computing. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 2017.  
    ^  Zuse, Horst. "Part 4: Konrad Zuse's Z1 and Z3 Computers". The Life and Work of Konrad Zuse. EPE Online. Archived from the original on 1 June 2008. Retrieved 17 June  2008 .  
    ^  Zuse, Konrad (2010) [1984], The Computer – My Life Translated by McKenna, Patricia and Ross, J. Andrew from: Der Computer, mein Lebenswerk (1984), Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, ISBN 978-3-642-08151-4  
    ^  Salz Trautman, Peggy (20 April 1994). "A Computer Pioneer Rediscovered, 50 Years On". The New York Times.  
    ^  Zuse, Konrad (1993). Der Computer. Mein Lebenswerk (in German) (3rd ed.). Berlin: Springer-Verlag. p. 55. ISBN 978-3-540-56292-4.  
    ^  "Crash! The Story of IT: Zuse". Archived from the original on 18 September 2016. Retrieved 1 June  2016 .  
    ^  Rojas, R. (1998). "How to make Zuse's Z3 a universal computer". IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 20 (3): 51–54. doi:10.1109/85.707574.  
    ^  Rojas, Raúl. "How to Make Zuse's Z3 a Universal Computer" (PDF) .  
    ^  15 January 1941 notice in the Des Moines Register, 
    ^  Arthur W. Burks. The First Electronic Computer.  
    ^ a b c d  Copeland, Jack (2006), Colossus: The Secrets of Bletchley Park's Codebreaking Computers, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 101–115, ISBN 978-0-19-284055-4  
    ^  Miller, Joe (10 November 2014). "The woman who cracked Enigma cyphers". BBC News. Retrieved 14 October  2018 .  
    ^  Bearne, Suzanne (24 July 2018). "Meet the female codebreakers of Bletchley Park". the Guardian. Retrieved 14 October  2018 .  
    ^  Bletchley's code-cracking Colossus, BBC News, 2 February 2010, retrieved 19 October  2012   
    ^  "Colossus – The Rebuild Story". The National Museum of Computing. Archived from the original on 18 April 2015. Retrieved 7 January  2014 .  
    ^  Randell, Brian; Fensom, Harry; Milne, Frank A. (15 March 1995), "Obituary: Allen Coombs", The Independent, retrieved 18 October  2012   
    ^  Fensom, Jim (8 November 2010), "Harry Fensom obituary", The Guardian, retrieved 17 October  2012   
    ^  John Presper Eckert Jr. and John W. Mauchly, Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer, United States Patent Office, US Patent 3,120,606, filed 26 June 1947, issued 4 February 1964, and invalidated 19 October 1973 after court ruling on Honeywell v. Sperry Rand. 
    ^  Evans 2018, p. 39. 
    ^  Light 1999, p. 459. 
    ^  "Generations of Computer". techiwarehouse.com.  
    ^  Turing, A. M. (1937). "On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entscheidungsproblem". Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society. 2. 42 (1): 230–265. doi:10.1112/plms/s2-42.1.230.  
    ^  "von Neumann ... firmly emphasized to me, and to others I am sure, that the fundamental conception is owing to Turing—insofar as not anticipated by Babbage, Lovelace and others." Letter by Stanley Frankel to Brian Randell, 1972, quoted in Jack Copeland (2004) The Essential Turing, p22. 
    ^  Enticknap, Nicholas (Summer 1998), "Computing's Golden Jubilee", Resurrection (20), ISSN 0958-7403, archived from the original on 9 January 2012, retrieved 19 April  2008   
    ^  "Early computers at Manchester University", Resurrection, 1 (4), Summer 1992, ISSN 0958-7403, archived from the original on 28 August 2017, retrieved 7 July  2010   
    ^  Early Electronic Computers (1946–51), University of Manchester, archived from the original on 5 January 2009, retrieved 16 November  2008   
    ^  Napper, R. B. E., Introduction to the Mark 1, The University of Manchester, archived from the original on 26 October 2008, retrieved 4 November  2008   
    ^  Computer Conservation Society, Our Computer Heritage Pilot Study: Deliveries of Ferranti Mark I and Mark I Star computers, archived from the original on 11 December 2016, retrieved 9 January  2010   
    ^  Lavington, Simon. "A brief history of British computers: the first 25 years (1948–1973)". British Computer Society. Retrieved 10 January  2010 .  
    ^  Lee, Thomas H. (2003). The Design of CMOS Radio-Frequency Integrated Circuits (PDF) . Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781139643771.  
    ^  Puers, Robert; Baldi, Livio; Voorde, Marcel Van de; Nooten, Sebastiaan E. van (2017). Nanoelectronics: Materials, Devices, Applications, 2 Volumes. John Wiley & Sons. p. 14. ISBN 9783527340538.  
    ^  Lavington, Simon (1998), A History of Manchester Computers (2 ed.), Swindon: The British Computer Society, pp. 34–35  
    ^ a b  Cooke-Yarborough, E. H. (June 1998), "Some early transistor applications in the UK", Engineering and Science Education Journal, 7 (3): 100–106, doi:10.1049/esej:19980301, ISSN 0963-7346, retrieved 7 June  2009   (subscription required)  
    ^  Cooke-Yarborough, E.H. (1957). Introduction to Transistor Circuits. Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd. p. 139.  
    ^ a b  "1960 - Metal Oxide Semiconductor (MOS) Transistor Demonstrated". The Silicon Engine. Computer History Museum.  
    ^  Lojek, Bo (2007). History of Semiconductor Engineering. Springer Science & Business Media. pp. 321–3. ISBN 9783540342588.  
    ^  Motoyoshi, M. (2009). "Through-Silicon Via (TSV)" (PDF) . Proceedings of the IEEE. 97 (1): 43–48. doi:10.1109/JPROC.2008.2007462. ISSN 0018-9219.  
    ^  "Transistors Keep Moore's Law Alive". EETimes. 12 December 2018. Retrieved 18 July  2019 .  
    ^  "Who Invented the Transistor?". Computer History Museum. 4 December 2013. Retrieved 20 July  2019 .  
    ^  Hittinger, William C. (1973). "METAL-OXIDE-SEMICONDUCTOR TECHNOLOGY". Scientific American. 229 (2): 48–59. ISSN 0036-8733.  
    ^  "Dawon Kahng". National Inventors Hall of Fame. Retrieved 27 June  2019 .  
    ^  "Martin Atalla in Inventors Hall of Fame, 2009". Retrieved 21 June  2013 .  
    ^  "Triumph of the MOS Transistor". YouTube. Computer History Museum. 6 August 2010. Retrieved 21 July  2019 .  
    ^  "The Hapless Tale of Geoffrey Dummer" Archived 11 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine, (n.d.), (HTML), Electronic Product News, accessed 8 July 2008. 
    ^  Kilby, Jack (2000), Nobel lecture (PDF) , Stockholm: Nobel Foundation, retrieved 15 May  2008   
    ^  The Chip that Jack Built, (c. 2008), (HTML), Texas Instruments, Retrieved 29 May 2008. 
    ^  Jack S. Kilby, Miniaturized Electronic Circuits, United States Patent Office, US Patent 3,138,743, filed 6 February 1959, issued 23 June 1964. 
    ^  Winston, Brian (1998). Media Technology and Society: A History : From the Telegraph to the Internet. Routledge. p. 221. ISBN 978-0-415-14230-4.  
    ^  Robert Noyce's Unitary circuit, US patent 2981877, "Semiconductor device-and-lead structure", issued 1961-04-25, assigned to Fairchild Semiconductor Corporation     
    ^  Lojek, Bo (2007). History of Semiconductor Engineering. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 120. ISBN 9783540342588.  
    ^  Bassett, Ross Knox (2007). To the Digital Age: Research Labs, Start-up Companies, and the Rise of MOS Technology. Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 46. ISBN 9780801886393.  
    ^ a b  "Tortoise of Transistors Wins the Race - CHM Revolution". Computer History Museum. Retrieved 22 July  2019 .  
    ^  "1964 – First Commercial MOS IC Introduced". Computer History Museum.  
    ^  "1968: Silicon Gate Technology Developed for ICs". Computer History Museum. Retrieved 22 July  2019 .  
    ^  Kuo, Yue (1 January 2013). "Thin Film Transistor Technology—Past, Present, and Future" (PDF) . The Electrochemical Society Interface. 22 (1): 55–61. doi:10.1149/2.F06131if. ISSN 1064-8208.  
    ^ a b  "1971: Microprocessor Integrates CPU Function onto a Single Chip". Computer History Museum. Retrieved 22 July  2019 .  
    ^  Colinge, Jean-Pierre; Greer, James C.; Greer, Jim (2016). Nanowire Transistors: Physics of Devices and Materials in One Dimension. Cambridge University Press. p. 2. ISBN 9781107052406.  
    ^  Intel's First Microprocessor—the Intel 4004, Intel Corp., November 1971, archived from the original on 13 May 2008, retrieved 17 May  2008   
    ^  The Intel 4004 (1971) die was 12 mm2, composed of 2300 transistors; by comparison, the Pentium Pro was 306 mm2, composed of 5.5 million transistors, according to Patterson, David; Hennessy, John (1998), Computer Organization and Design, San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann, pp. 27–39, ISBN 978-1-55860-428-5  
    ^  Federico Faggin, The Making of the First Microprocessor, IEEE Solid-State Circuits Magazine, Winter 2009, IEEE Xplore 
    ^  Hittinger, William C. (1973). "METAL-OXIDE-SEMICONDUCTOR TECHNOLOGY". Scientific American. 229 (2): 48–59. ISSN 0036-8733.  
    ^ a b  https://www.networkworld.com/article/3154386/7-dazzling-smartphone-improvements-with-qualcomms-snapdragon-835-chip.html 
    ^  Chartier, David (23 December 2008). "Global notebook shipments finally overtake desktops". Ars Technica.  
    ^  IDC (25 July 2013). "Growth Accelerates in the Worldwide Mobile Phone and Smartphone Markets in the Second Quarter, According to IDC". Archived from the original on 26 June 2014.  
    ^  Most major 64-bit instruction set architectures are extensions of earlier designs. All of the architectures listed in this table, except for Alpha, existed in 32-bit forms before their 64-bit incarnations were introduced. 
    ^  The control unit's role in interpreting instructions has varied somewhat in the past. Although the control unit is solely responsible for instruction interpretation in most modern computers, this is not always the case. Some computers have instructions that are partially interpreted by the control unit with further interpretation performed by another device. For example, EDVAC, one of the earliest stored-program computers, used a central control unit that only interpreted four instructions. All of the arithmetic-related instructions were passed on to its arithmetic unit and further decoded there. 
    ^  Instructions often occupy more than one memory address, therefore the program counter usually increases by the number of memory locations required to store one instruction. 
    ^  David J. Eck (2000). The Most Complex Machine: A Survey of Computers and Computing. A K Peters, Ltd. p. 54. ISBN 978-1-56881-128-4.  
    ^  Erricos John Kontoghiorghes (2006). Handbook of Parallel Computing and Statistics. CRC Press. p. 45. ISBN 978-0-8247-4067-2.  
    ^  Flash memory also may only be rewritten a limited number of times before wearing out, making it less useful for heavy random access usage. (Verma & Mielke 1988) 
    ^  Donald Eadie (1968). Introduction to the Basic Computer. Prentice-Hall. p. 12.  
    ^  Arpad Barna; Dan I. Porat (1976). Introduction to Microcomputers and the Microprocessors. Wiley. p. 85. ISBN 978-0-471-05051-3.  
    ^  Jerry Peek; Grace Todino; John Strang (2002). Learning the UNIX Operating System: A Concise Guide for the New User. O'Reilly. p. 130. ISBN 978-0-596-00261-9.  
    ^  Gillian M. Davis (2002). Noise Reduction in Speech Applications. CRC Press. p. 111. ISBN 978-0-8493-0949-6.  
    ^  However, it is also very common to construct supercomputers out of many pieces of cheap commodity hardware; usually individual computers connected by networks. These so-called computer clusters can often provide supercomputer performance at a much lower cost than customized designs. While custom architectures are still used for most of the most powerful supercomputers, there has been a proliferation of cluster computers in recent years. (TOP500 2006) 
    ^  Even some later computers were commonly programmed directly in machine code. Some minicomputers like the DEC PDP-8 could be programmed directly from a panel of switches. However, this method was usually used only as part of the booting process. Most modern computers boot entirely automatically by reading a boot program from some non-volatile memory. 
    ^  However, there is sometimes some form of machine language compatibility between different computers. An x86-64 compatible microprocessor like the AMD Athlon 64 is able to run most of the same programs that an Intel Core 2 microprocessor can, as well as programs designed for earlier microprocessors like the Intel Pentiums and Intel 80486. This contrasts with very early commercial computers, which were often one-of-a-kind and totally incompatible with other computers. 
    ^  High level languages are also often interpreted rather than compiled. Interpreted languages are translated into machine code on the fly, while running, by another program called an interpreter. 
    ^  It is not universally true that bugs are solely due to programmer oversight. Computer hardware may fail or may itself have a fundamental problem that produces unexpected results in certain situations. For instance, the Pentium FDIV bug caused some Intel microprocessors in the early 1990s to produce inaccurate results for certain floating point division operations. This was caused by a flaw in the microprocessor design and resulted in a partial recall of the affected devices. 
    ^  Taylor, Alexander L., III (16 April 1984). "The Wizard Inside the Machine". TIME. Retrieved 17 February  2007 .  (subscription required)  
    ^  Agatha C. Hughes (2000). Systems, Experts, and Computers. MIT Press. p. 161. ISBN 978-0-262-08285-3. The experience of SAGE helped make possible the first truly large-scale commercial real-time network: the SABRE computerized airline reservations system ...  
    ^  Leiner, Barry M.; Cerf, Vinton G.; Clark, David D.; Kahn, Robert E.; Kleinrock, Leonard; Lynch, Daniel C.; Postel, Jon; Roberts, Larry G.; Wolf, Stephen (1999). "A Brief History of the Internet". Internet Society. arXiv:cs/9901011 . Bibcode:1999cs........1011L. Retrieved 20 September  2008 .  
    ^  According to the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary (6th ed, 2007), the word computer dates back to the mid 17th century, when it referred to "A person who makes calculations; specifically a person employed for this in an observatory etc." 
    ^  "Definition of computer". Thefreedictionary.com. Retrieved 29 January  2012 .  
    ^  II, Joseph D. Dumas (2005). Computer Architecture: Fundamentals and Principles of Computer Design. CRC Press. p. 340. ISBN 9780849327490.  

Notes 

    Evans, Claire L. (2018). Broad Band: The Untold Story of the Women Who Made the Internet. New York: Portfolio/Penguin. ISBN 9780735211759. 
    Fuegi, J.; Francis, J. (2003). "Lovelace & Babbage and the creation of the 1843 'notes' ". IEEE Annals of the History of Computing. 25 (4): 16. doi:10.1109/MAHC.2003.1253887. 
    a  Kempf, Karl (1961). "Historical Monograph: Electronic Computers Within the Ordnance Corps". Aberdeen Proving Ground (United States Army). 
    a  Phillips, Tony (2000). "The Antikythera Mechanism I". American Mathematical Society. Retrieved 5 April  2006 . 
    a  Shannon, Claude Elwood (1940). "A symbolic analysis of relay and switching circuits". Massachusetts Institute of Technology. hdl:1721.1/11173. 
    Digital Equipment Corporation (1972). PDP-11/40 Processor Handbook (PDF) . Maynard, MA: Digital Equipment Corporation. 
    Verma, G.; Mielke, N. (1988). "Reliability performance of ETOX based flash memories". IEEE International Reliability Physics Symposium. 
    Swade, Doron D. (February 1993). "Redeeming Charles Babbage's Mechanical Computer". Scientific American. 268 (2): 86–91. Bibcode:1993SciAm.268b..86S. doi:10.1038/scientificamerican0293-86. JSTOR 24941379. 
    Meuer, Hans; Strohmaier, Erich; Simon, Horst; Dongarra, Jack (13 November 2006). "Architectures Share Over Time". TOP500. Archived from the original on 20 February 2007. Retrieved 27 November  2006 . 
    Lavington, Simon (1998). A History of Manchester Computers (2 ed.). Swindon: The British Computer Society. ISBN 978-0-902505-01-8. 
    Light, Jennifer S. (1999). "When Computers Were Women". Technology and Culture. 40 (3): 455–483. JSTOR 25147356. 
    Stokes, Jon (2007). Inside the Machine: An Illustrated Introduction to Microprocessors and Computer Architecture. San Francisco: No Starch Press. ISBN 978-1-59327-104-6. 
    Zuse, Konrad (1993). The Computer – My life. Berlin: Pringler-Verlag. ISBN 978-0-387-56453-1. 
    Felt, Dorr E. (1916). Mechanical arithmetic, or The history of the counting machine. Chicago: Washington Institute. 
    Ifrah, Georges (2001). The Universal History of Computing: From the Abacus to the Quantum Computer. New York: John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-0-471-39671-0. 
    Berkeley, Edmund (1949). Giant Brains, or Machines That Think. John Wiley & Sons. 
    Cohen, Bernard (2000). Howard Aiken, Portrait of a computer pioneer. Physics Today. 53. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press. pp. 74–75. Bibcode:2000PhT....53c..74C. doi:10.1063/1.883007. ISBN 978-0-262-53179-5. 
    Ligonnière, Robert (1987). Préhistoire et Histoire des ordinateurs. Paris: Robert Laffont. ISBN 978-2-221-05261-7. 
    Couffignal, Louis (1933). Les machines à calculer ; leurs principes, leur évolution. Paris: Gauthier-Villars. 
    Essinger, James (2004). Jacquard's Web, How a hand loom led to the birth of the information age. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-280577-5. 
    Hyman, Anthony (1985). Charles Babbage: Pioneer of the Computer. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-02377-9. 
    Bowden, B. V. (1953). Faster than thought. New York, Toronto, London: Pitman publishing corporation. 
    Moseley, Maboth (1964). Irascible Genius, Charles Babbage, inventor. London: Hutchinson. 
    Collier, Bruce (1970). The little engine that could've: The calculating machines of Charles Babbage. Garland Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-0-8240-0043-1. 
    Randell, Brian (1982). "From Analytical Engine to Electronic Digital Computer: The Contributions of Ludgate, Torres, and Bush" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF)  on 21 September 2013. Retrieved 29 October  2013 . 
    Smith, Erika E. (2013). "Recognizing a Collective Inheritance through the History of Women in Computing". CLCWeb: Comparative Literature & Culture: A WWWeb Journal. 15 (1): 1–9. doi:10.7771/1481-4374.1972. 

External links 

    Media related to Computers at Wikimedia Commons
    Wikiversity has a quiz on this article
    Warhol & The Computer


Authority control [Image: Edit this at Wikidata]  

    BNF: cb119401913 (data)  
    GND: 4070083-5  
    LCCN: sh85029552  
    NARA: 10636641  
    NDL: 00561435  

    v
    t
    e

Basic computer components
Input devices

    Keyboard
    Image scanner
    Microphone
    Pointing device
        Graphics tablet
        Game controller
        Light pen
        Mouse
            Optical
        Pointing stick
        Touchpad
        Touchscreen
        Trackball
    Refreshable braille display
    Sound card
    Webcam
        Softcam
    Video card

Output devices

    Monitor
    Refreshable braille display
    Printer
    Speakers
    Plotter
    Sound card
    Video card

Removable
data storage

    Optical disc
        CD
        DVD
        Blu-ray
    Disk pack
    Floppy disk
    Memory card
    USB flash drive

Computer case

    Central processing unit (CPU)
    HDD / SSD / SSHD
    Motherboard
    Network interface controller
    Power supply
    Random-access memory (RAM)
    Fax modem
    Expansion card

Ports

    Ethernet
    FireWire (IEEE 1394)
    Parallel port
    Serial port
    PS/2 port
    USB
    Thunderbolt
    DisplayPort / HDMI / DVI / VGA
    eSATA
    Audio jack

    v
    t
    e

Digital electronics
Components

    Combinational logic
    Sequential logic
    Integrated circuit (IC)
    Logic gate

Theory

    Digital signal
    Boolean algebra
    Logic synthesis
    Logic in computer science
    Computer architecture
    Digital signal
        Digital signal processing
    Circuit minimization
    Switching circuit theory

Design

    Logic synthesis
    Place and route
        Placement
        Routing
    Register-transfer level
        Hardware description language
        High-level synthesis
    Formal equivalence checking
    Synchronous logic
    Asynchronous logic
    Finite-state machine
        Hierarchical state machine

Applications

    Computer hardware
        Hardware acceleration
    Digital audio
        radio
    Digital photography
    Digital telephone
    Digital video
        cinema
        television
    Electronic literature

Design issues

    Metastability
    Runt pulse

    v
    t
    e

Electronics
Branches

    Analog electronics
    Digital electronics
    Electronic instrumentation
    Electronics engineering
    Microelectronics
    Optoelectronics
    Power electronics
    Printed electronics
    Semiconductor
    Schematic capture
    Thermal management

Advanced topics

    Atomtronics
    Bioelectronics
    Failure modes of electronics
    Flexible electronics
    Low-power electronics
    Molecular electronics
    Nanoelectronics
    Organic electronics
    Photonics
    Piezotronics
    Quantum electronics
    Spintronics

Electronic equipment

    Air conditioner
    Central heating
    Clothes dryer
    Computer/Notebook
    Dishwasher
    Freezer
    Home robot
    Home cinema
    Home theater PC
    Information technologies
    Cooker
    Microwave oven
    Refrigerator
    Robotic vacuum cleaner
    Tablet
    Telephone
    Television
    Water heater
    Washing machine

Applications

    Audio electronics
    Automotive electronics
    Avionics
    Control Systems
    Consumer electronics
    Data acquisition
    E-health
    Electronic book
    Electronics industry
    Electronic warfare
    Embedded systems
    Home automation
    Integrated circuit
    Marine electronics
    Microwave technology
    Military electronics
    Multimedia
    Nuclear electronics
    Open hardware
    Radar and Radionavigation
    Radio electronics
    Terahertz technology
    Video hardware
    Wired and Wireless Communications

Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Computer&oldid=908661117"
Categories:

    Computers
    Consumer electronics
    1990s fads and trends
    2000s fads and trends

Hidden categories:

    Webarchive template wayback links
    CS1 German-language sources (de)
    Pages containing links to subscription-only content
    Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages
    Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages
    Articles with short description
    Articles which use infobox templates with no data rows
    Articles to be split from May 2017
    All articles to be split
    Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2019
    All articles with unsourced statements
    Articles with unsourced statements from December 2007
    Articles with unsourced statements from May 2014
    Articles needing additional references from July 2012
    All articles needing additional references
    Articles with unsourced statements from September 2015
    Commons category link is on Wikidata
    Use dmy dates from July 2017
    Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with NARA identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers
    Articles containing video clips
    Articles with example code

Navigation menu
Personal tools

    Not logged in
    Talk
    Contributions
    Create account
    Log in

Namespaces

    Article 
    Talk 

Variants 

Views

    Read 
    View source 
    View history 

More 

Search
Navigation

    Main page
    Contents
    Featured content
    Current events
    Random article
    Donate to Wikipedia
    Wikipedia store

Interaction

    Help
    About Wikipedia
    Community portal
    Recent changes
    Contact page

Tools

    What links here
    Related changes
    Upload file
    Special pages
    Permanent link
    Page information
    Wikidata item
    Cite this page

In other projects

    Wikimedia Commons
    Wikiquote

Print/export

    Create a book
    Download as PDF
    Printable version

Languages

    Acèh
    Afrikaans
    Alemannisch
    አማርኛ
    Ænglisc
    Аҧсшәа
    العربية
    Aragonés
    ܐܪܡܝܐ
    অসমীয়া
    Asturianu
    Avañe'ẽ
    Azərbaycanca
    تۆرکجه
    বাংলা
    B'n-l'm-gú
    Башҡортса
    Беларуская
    Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎
    भोजपुरी
    Bislama
    Български
    Boarisch
    བོད་ཡིག
    Bosanski
    Brezhoneg
    Буряад
    Català
    Чӑвашла
    Cebuano
    Čeština
    Cymraeg
    Dansk
    Deutsch
    डोटेली
    Eesti
    Ελληνικά
    Emiliàn e rumagnòl
    Эрзянь
    Español
    Esperanto
    Euskara
    فارسی
    Fiji Hindi
    Føroyskt
    Français
    Furlan
    Gaeilge
    Gaelg
    Gàidhlig
    Galego
    贛語
    Gĩkũyũ
    ગુજરાતી
    𐌲𐌿𐍄𐌹𐍃𐌺
    客家語/Hak-k'-ngî
    한국어
    Hausa
    Հայերեն
    Արեւմտահայերէն
    हिन्दी
    Hrvatski
    Ido
    Igbo
    Ilokano
    বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী
    Bahasa Indonesia
    Interlingua
    Interlingue
    ᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ/inuktitut
    Iñupiak
    IsiXhosa
    IsiZulu
    Íslenska
    Italiano
    עברית
    Jawa
    Kabɩyɛ
    ಕನ್ನಡ
    Kapampangan
    Къарачай-малкъар
    ქართული
    कॉशुर / کٲشُر
    Kaszëbsczi
    Қазақша
    Kernowek
    Kiswahili
    Коми
    Kongo
    Kreyòl ayisyen
    Kurdî
    Кыргызча
    Ladino
    ລາວ
    لۊری شومالی
    Latina
    Latviešu
    Lëtzebuergesch
    Лезги
    Lietuvių
    Ligure
    Limburgs
    Lingála
    Lingua Franca Nova
    Livvinkarjala
    La .lojban.
    Lumbaart
    Magyar
    मैथिली
    Македонски
    Malagasy
    മലയാളം
    Malti
    मराठी
    მარგალური
    مصرى
    مازِرونی
    Bahasa Melayu
    Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄
    Mirandés
    Монгол
    မြန်မာဘာသာ
    Nāhuatl
    Nederlands
    Nedersaksies
    नेपाली
    नेपाल भाषा
    日本語
    Napulitano
    Нохчийн
    Norsk
    Norsk nynorsk
    Occitan
    Олык марий
    ଓଡ଼ିଆ
    Oromoo
    Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча
    ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
    پنجابی
    پښتو
    Patois
    ភាសាខ្មែរ
    Piemontèis
    Plattdüütsch
    Polski
    Ποντιακά
    Português
    Qaraqalpaqsha
    Qırımtatarca
    Rom'nă
    Romani čhib
    Runa Simi
    Русиньскый
    Русский
    Саха тыла
    ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ
    संस्कृतम्
    Sardu
    Scots
    Seeltersk
    Sesotho
    Shqip
    Sicilianu
    සිංහල
    Simple English
    سنڌي
    Slovenčina
    Slovenščina
    Словѣньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟ
    Ślůnski
    Soomaaliga
    کوردی
    Српски / srpski
    Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
    Basa Sunda
    Suomi
    Svenska
    Tagalog
    தமிழ்
    Татарча/tatarça
    తెలుగు
    ไทย
    Тоҷикӣ
    Tsetsêhest'hese
    ತುಳು
    Türkçe
    Türkmençe
    Thuɔŋjäŋ
    ᨅᨔ ᨕᨘᨁᨗ
    Українська
    اردو
    ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche
    Vahcuengh
    Vèneto
    Vepsän kel’
    Tiếng Việt
    Võro
    Walon
    文言
    West-Vlams
    Winaray
    Wolof
    吴语
    Xitsonga
    ייִדיש
    Yorùbá
    粵語
    Zazaki
    Žemaitėška
    中文

Edit links 

    This page was last edited on 31 July 2019, at 04:41 (UTC) .
    Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

    Privacy policy
    About Wikipedia
    Disclaimers
    Contact Wikipedia
    Developers
    Cookie statement
    Mobile view

    [Image: Wikimedia Foundation]  	
    [Image: Powered by MediaWiki]  	



Textise: Back to top
This text-only page was created by Textise (www.textise.net) © Textise - CPC LLC
To find out more about our product, visit Textise.org.


-------------------------------------------------



Are you a webmaster? Find out how to easily add Textise to your web site.

This page has been Textised!
The original page address was https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_II
For sharing use http://tinyurl.com/np3aqag

Here are some options:

- Back to original page (in this window | in a new window)
- Convert this page to a PDF
- Print this page
- Textise Home Page (full version | text only version)
- Textise Options Page (choose font size, font colour, etc.)

Are you a webmaster? Find out how to easily add Textise to your web site.

[Image: This is a good article. Follow the link for more information.]  
[Image: Page semi-protected]  
World War II
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation Jump to search

1939–1945 global war
"The Second World War", "WWII", and "WW2" redirect here. For other uses, see The Second World War (disambiguation) and WWII (disambiguation).

World War II[Image: Infobox collage for WWII.PNG]  
(clockwise from top left)

    Chinese forces in the Battle of Wanjialing
    Australian 25-pounder guns during the First Battle of El Alamein
    German Stuka dive bombers on the Eastern Front in December 1943
    US naval force in the Lingayen Gulf
    Wilhelm Keitel signing the German Instrument of Surrender
    Soviet troops in the Battle of Stalingrad

Date

    1 September 1939 – 2 September 1945 (1939-09-01  – 1945-09-02 ) 
    (6 years and 1 day)[a]

Location
Europe, Pacific, Atlantic, South-East Asia, China, Middle East, Mediterranean, North Africa, Horn of Africa, Australia, briefly North and South America
Result

    Allied victory

    Collapse of Nazi Germany
    Fall of the Japanese and Italian Empires
    Allied occupations of Germany and Japan and foundation of the Italian Republic
    Beginning of the Nuclear Age
    Dissolution of the League of Nations and creation of the United Nations
    Emergence of the United States and the Soviet Union as rival superpowers and beginning of the Cold War (more...)

Participants Allies AxisCommanders and leaders Main Allied leaders

    [Image: Soviet Union]    Joseph Stalin
    [Image: United States]    Franklin D. Roosevelt
    [Image: United Kingdom]    Winston Churchill
    [Image: Republic of China (1912–1949)]    Chiang Kai-shek

Main Axis leaders

    [Image: Nazi Germany]    Adolf Hitler
    [Image: Empire of Japan]    Hirohito
    [Image: Kingdom of Italy]    Benito Mussolini

Casualties and losses

    Military dead:
    Over 16,000,000
    Civilian dead:
    Over 45,000,000
    Total dead:
    Over 61,000,000
    (1937–1945)
    ...further details

    Military dead:
    Over 8,000,000
    Civilian dead:
    Over 4,000,000
    Total dead:
    Over 12,000,000
    (1937–1945)
    ...further details

    v
    t
    e

Campaigns of World War II  
Europe

    Poland
    Phoney War
    Winter War
    Denmark & Norway
    France & Benelux
    Britain
    Balkans
    Eastern Front
    Finland
    Western Front (1944–45)

Pacific War

    China
    Pacific Ocean
    South-East Asia
    South West Pacific
    Japan
    Manchuria & North Korea

Mediterranean and Middle East

    North Africa
    East Africa
    Mediterranean Sea
    Adriatic
    Malta
    Yugoslavia
    Iraq
    Syria–Lebanon
    Iran
    Italy
    Dodecanese
    Southern France

Other campaigns

    Atlantic
    Arctic
    Strategic bombing
    Americas
    French West Africa
    Indian Ocean

        Madagascar

Contemporaneous wars

    Soviet–Japanese border conflicts
    Franco-Thai War
    Ecuadorian–Peruvian War
    Ili Rebellion

World War II Alphabetical indices

    A B C D E F G H I J K L M
    N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z
    0–9

Navigation

        Campaigns
        Countries
        Equipment
        Timeline
        Outline
        Lists
        Portal
        Category
        Bibliography

    v
    t
    e

World War II (often abbreviated to WWII or WW2), also known as the Second World War, was a global war that lasted from 1939 to 1945. The vast majority of the world's countries—including all the great powers—eventually formed two opposing military alliances: the Allies and the Axis. A state of total war emerged, directly involving more than 100 million people from over 30 countries. The major participants threw their entire economic, industrial, and scientific capabilities behind the war effort, blurring the distinction between civilian and military resources. World War II was the deadliest conflict in human history, marked by 70 to 85 million fatalities, most of whom were civilians in the Soviet Union and China. It included massacres, the genocide of the Holocaust, strategic bombing, premeditated death from starvation and disease, and the only use of nuclear weapons in war.[1][2][3][4]

Japan, which aimed to dominate Asia and the Pacific, was at war with China by 1937,[5][b] though neither side had declared war on the other. World War II is generally said to have begun on 1 September 1939,[7] with the invasion of Poland by Germany and subsequent declarations of war on Germany by France and the United Kingdom. From late 1939 to early 1941, in a series of campaigns and treaties, Germany conquered or controlled much of continental Europe, and formed the Axis alliance with Italy and Japan. Under the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact of August 1939, Germany and the Soviet Union partitioned and annexed territories of their European neighbours, Poland, Finland, Romania and the Baltic states. Following the onset of campaigns in North Africa and East Africa, and the Fall of France in mid 1940, the war continued primarily between the European Axis powers and the British Empire. War in the Balkans, the aerial Battle of Britain, the Blitz, and the long Battle of the Atlantic followed. On 22 June 1941, the European Axis powers launched an invasion of the Soviet Union, opening the largest land theatre of war in history. This Eastern Front trapped the Axis, most crucially the German Wehrmacht, into a war of attrition. In December 1941, Japan launched a surprise attack on the United States as well as European colonies in the Pacific. Following an immediate U.S. declaration of war against Japan, supported by one from Great Britain, the European Axis powers quickly declared war on the U.S. in solidarity with their Japanese ally. Rapid Japanese conquests over much of the Western Pacific ensued, perceived by many in Asia as liberation from Western dominance and resulting in the support of several armies from defeated territories.

The Axis advance in the Pacific halted in 1942 when Japan lost the critical Battle of Midway; later, Germany and Italy were defeated in North Africa and then, decisively, at Stalingrad in the Soviet Union. Key setbacks in 1943, which included a series of German defeats on the Eastern Front, the Allied invasions of Sicily and Italy, and Allied victories in the Pacific, cost the Axis its initiative and forced it into strategic retreat on all fronts. In 1944, the Western Allies invaded German-occupied France, while the Soviet Union regained its territorial losses and turned toward Germany and its allies. During 1944 and 1945 the Japanese suffered major reverses in mainland Asia in Central China, South China and Burma, while the Allies crippled the Japanese Navy and captured key Western Pacific islands.

The war in Europe concluded with an invasion of Germany by the Western Allies and the Soviet Union, culminating in the capture of Berlin by Soviet troops, the suicide of Adolf Hitler and the German unconditional surrender on 8 May 1945. Following the Potsdam Declaration by the Allies on 26 July 1945 and the refusal of Japan to surrender under its terms, the United States dropped atomic bombs on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki on 6 and 9 August respectively. With an invasion of the Japanese archipelago imminent, the possibility of additional atomic bombings, the Soviet entry into the war against Japan and its invasion of Manchuria, Japan announced its intention to surrender on 15 August 1945, cementing total victory in Asia for the Allies. Tribunals were set up by the Allies and war crimes trials were conducted in the wake of the war both against the Germans and the Japanese.

World War II changed the political alignment and social structure of the globe. The United Nations (UN) was established to foster international co-operation and prevent future conflicts; the victorious great powers—China, France, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, and the United States—became the permanent members of its Security Council.[8] The Soviet Union and United States emerged as rival superpowers, setting the stage for the nearly half-century long Cold War. In the wake of European devastation, the influence of its great powers waned, triggering the decolonisation of Africa and Asia. Most countries whose industries had been damaged moved towards economic recovery and expansion. Political integration, especially in Europe, emerged as an effort to end pre-war enmities and create a common identity.[9]

Contents 

    1  Chronology 
    2  Background 
        2.1  Europe 
        2.2  Asia 
    3  Pre-war events 
        3.1  Italian invasion of Ethiopia (1935) 
        3.2  Spanish Civil War (1936–1939) 
        3.3  Japanese invasion of China (1937) 
        3.4  Soviet–Japanese border conflicts 
        3.5  European occupations and agreements 
    4  Course of the war 
        4.1  War breaks out in Europe (1939–40) 
        4.2  Western Europe (1940–41) 
        4.3  Mediterranean (1940–41) 
        4.4  Axis attack on the Soviet Union (1941) 
        4.5  War breaks out in the Pacific (1941) 
        4.6  Axis advance stalls (1942–43) 
            4.6.1  Pacific (1942–43) 
            4.6.2  Eastern Front (1942–43) 
            4.6.3  Western Europe/Atlantic and Mediterranean (1942–43) 
        4.7  Allies gain momentum (1943–44) 
        4.8  Allies close in (1944) 
        4.9  Axis collapse, Allied victory (1944–45) 
    5  Aftermath 
    6  Impact 
        6.1  Casualties and war crimes 
        6.2  Genocide, concentration camps, and slave labour 
        6.3  Occupation 
        6.4  Home fronts and production 
        6.5  Advances in technology and warfare 
    7  See also 
    8  Notes 
    9  Citations 
    10  References 
    11  External links 

Chronology 
See also: Timeline of World War II
Timelines of World War II Chronological Prelude

    (in Asia
    in Europe)

    1939
    1940
    1941
    1942

    1943
    1944
    1945 onwards

By topic

    Diplomacy
    Declarations of war
        Engagements
        Operations
    Battle of Europe air operations
        Eastern Front
        Manhattan Project
    United Kingdom home front
    Surrender of the Axis armies

    v
    t
    e

The start of the war in Europe is generally held to be 1 September 1939,[10][11] beginning with the German invasion of Poland; the United Kingdom and France declared war on Germany two days later. The dates for the beginning of war in the Pacific include the start of the Second Sino-Japanese War on 7 July 1937,[12][13] or even the Japanese invasion of Manchuria on 19 September 1931.[14][15]

Others follow the British historian A.J.P. Taylor, who held that the Sino-Japanese War and war in Europe and its colonies occurred simultaneously, and the two wars merged in 1941. This article uses the conventional dating. Other starting dates sometimes used for World War II include the Italian invasion of Abyssinia on 3 October 1935.[16] The British historian Antony Beevor views the beginning of World War II as the Battles of Khalkhin Gol fought between Japan and the forces of Mongolia and the Soviet Union from May to September 1939.[17]

The exact date of the war's end is also not universally agreed upon. It was generally accepted at the time that the war ended with the armistice of 14 August 1945 (V-J Day), rather than the formal surrender of Japan, which was on 2 September 1945 that officially ended the war in Asia. A peace treaty with Japan was signed in 1951.[18] A treaty regarding Germany's future allowed the reunification of East and West Germany to take place in 1990 and resolved most post-World War II issues.[19] No formal peace treaty between Japan and the Soviet Union was ever signed.[20]

Background 
Main article: Causes of World War II
Europe 
World War I had radically altered the political European map, with the defeat of the Central Powers—including Austria-Hungary, Germany, Bulgaria and the Ottoman Empire—and the 1917 Bolshevik seizure of power in Russia, which eventually led to the founding of the Soviet Union. Meanwhile, the victorious Allies of World War I, such as France, Belgium, Italy, Romania and Greece, gained territory, and new nation-states were created out of the collapse of Austria-Hungary and the Ottoman and Russian Empires.

The League of Nations assembly, held in Geneva, Switzerland, 1930
To prevent a future world war, the League of Nations was created during the 1919 Paris Peace Conference. The organisation's primary goals were to prevent armed conflict through collective security, military and naval disarmament, and settling international disputes through peaceful negotiations and arbitration.

Despite strong pacifist sentiment after World War I,[21] its aftermath still caused irredentist and revanchist nationalism in several European states. These sentiments were especially marked in Germany because of the significant territorial, colonial, and financial losses incurred by the Treaty of Versailles. Under the treaty, Germany lost around 13 percent of its home territory and all of its overseas possessions, while German annexation of other states was prohibited, reparations were imposed, and limits were placed on the size and capability of the country's armed forces.[22]

The German Empire was dissolved in the German Revolution of 1918–1919, and a democratic government, later known as the Weimar Republic, was created. The interwar period saw strife between supporters of the new republic and hardline opponents on both the right and left. Italy, as an Entente ally, had made some post-war territorial gains; however, Italian nationalists were angered that the promises made by the United Kingdom and France to secure Italian entrance into the war were not fulfilled in the peace settlement. From 1922 to 1925, the Fascist movement led by Benito Mussolini seized power in Italy with a nationalist, totalitarian, and class collaborationist agenda that abolished representative democracy, repressed socialist, left-wing and liberal forces, and pursued an aggressive expansionist foreign policy aimed at making Italy a world power, promising the creation of a "New Roman Empire".[23]

Adolf Hitler at a German National Socialist political rally in Nuremberg, August 1933
Adolf Hitler, after an unsuccessful attempt to overthrow the German government in 1923, eventually became the Chancellor of Germany in 1933. He abolished democracy, espousing a radical, racially motivated revision of the world order, and soon began a massive rearmament campaign.[24] Meanwhile, France, to secure its alliance, allowed Italy a free hand in Ethiopia, which Italy desired as a colonial possession. The situation was aggravated in early 1935 when the Territory of the Saar Basin was legally reunited with Germany and Hitler repudiated the Treaty of Versailles, accelerated his rearmament programme, and introduced conscription.[25]

The United Kingdom, France and Italy formed the Stresa Front in April 1935 in order to contain Germany, a key step towards military globalization; however, that June, the United Kingdom made an independent naval agreement with Germany, easing prior restrictions. The Soviet Union, concerned by Germany's goals of capturing vast areas of Eastern Europe, drafted a treaty of mutual assistance with France. Before taking effect though, the Franco-Soviet pact was required to go through the bureaucracy of the League of Nations, which rendered it essentially toothless.[26] The United States, concerned with events in Europe and Asia, passed the Neutrality Act in August of the same year.[27]

Hitler defied the Versailles and Locarno treaties by remilitarising the Rhineland in March 1936, encountering little opposition due to appeasement.[28] In October 1936, Germany and Italy formed the Rome–Berlin Axis. A month later, Germany and Japan signed the Anti-Comintern Pact, which Italy would join in the following year.[29]

Asia 
The Kuomintang (KMT) party in China launched a unification campaign against regional warlords and nominally unified China in the mid-1920s, but was soon embroiled in a civil war against its former Chinese Communist Party allies[30] and new regional warlords. In 1931, an increasingly militaristic Empire of Japan, which had long sought influence in China[31] as the first step of what its government saw as the country's right to rule Asia, used the Mukden Incident as a pretext to launch an invasion of Manchuria and establish the puppet state of Manchukuo.[32]

China appealed to the League of Nations to stop the Japanese invasion of Manchuria. Japan withdrew from the League of Nations after being condemned for its incursion into Manchuria. The two nations then fought several battles, in Shanghai, Rehe and Hebei, until the Tanggu Truce was signed in 1933. Thereafter, Chinese volunteer forces continued the resistance to Japanese aggression in Manchuria, and Chahar and Suiyuan.[33] After the 1936 Xi'an Incident, the Kuomintang and communist forces agreed on a ceasefire to present a united front to oppose Japan.[34]

Pre-war events   Italian invasion of Ethiopia (1935) 
Main article: Second Italo-Ethiopian War
Benito Mussolini inspecting troops during the Italo-Ethiopian War, 1935
The Second Italo–Ethiopian War was a brief colonial war that began in October 1935 and ended in May 1936. The war began with the invasion of the Ethiopian Empire (also known as Abyssinia) by the armed forces of the Kingdom of Italy (Regno d'Italia), which was launched from Italian Somaliland and Eritrea.[35] The war resulted in the military occupation of Ethiopia and its annexation into the newly created colony of Italian East Africa (Africa Orientale Italiana, or AOI); in addition it exposed the weakness of the League of Nations as a force to preserve peace. Both Italy and Ethiopia were member nations, but the League did little when the former clearly violated Article X of the League's Covenant.[36] The United Kingdom and France supported imposing sanctions on Italy for the invasion, but they were not fully enforced and failed to end the Italian invasion.[37] Italy subsequently dropped its objections to Germany's goal of absorbing Austria.[38]



 Spanish Civil War (1936–1939) 
Main article: Spanish Civil War
The bombing of Guernica in 1937, during the Spanish Civil War, sparked fears abroad in Europe that the next war would be based on bombing of cities with very high civilian casualties
When civil war broke out in Spain, Hitler and Mussolini lent military support to the Nationalist rebels, led by General Francisco Franco. Italy supported the Nationalists to a greater extent than the Nazis did: altogether Mussolini sent to Spain more than 70,000 ground troops and 6,000 aviation personnel, as well as about 720 aircraft.[39] The Soviet Union supported the existing government, the Spanish Republic. Over 30,000 foreign volunteers, known as the International Brigades, also fought against the Nationalists. Both Germany and the Soviet Union used this proxy war as an opportunity to test in combat their most advanced weapons and tactics. The Nationalists won the civil war in April 1939; Franco, now dictator, remained officially neutral during World War II but generally favoured the Axis.[40] His greatest collaboration with Germany was the sending of volunteers to fight on the Eastern Front.[41]

 Japanese invasion of China (1937) 
Main article: Second Sino-Japanese War
Japanese Imperial Army soldiers during the Battle of Shanghai, 1937
In July 1937, Japan captured the former Chinese imperial capital of Peking after instigating the Marco Polo Bridge Incident, which culminated in the Japanese campaign to invade all of China.[42] The Soviets quickly signed a non-aggression pact with China to lend materiel support, effectively ending China's prior co-operation with Germany. From September to November, the Japanese attacked Taiyuan, engaged the Kuomintang Army around Xinkou,[43] and fought Communist forces in Pingxingguan.[44][45] Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek deployed his best army to defend Shanghai, but, after three months of fighting, Shanghai fell. The Japanese continued to push the Chinese forces back, capturing the capital Nanking in December 1937. After the fall of Nanking, tens of thousands if not hundreds of thousands of Chinese civilians and disarmed combatants were murdered by the Japanese.[46][47]

In March 1938, Nationalist Chinese forces won their first major victory at Taierzhuang but then the city of Xuzhou was taken by Japanese in May.[48] In June 1938, Chinese forces stalled the Japanese advance by flooding the Yellow River; this manoeuvre bought time for the Chinese to prepare their defences at Wuhan, but the city was taken by October.[49] Japanese military victories did not bring about the collapse of Chinese resistance that Japan had hoped to achieve; instead the Chinese government relocated inland to Chongqing and continued the war.[50][51]

 Soviet–Japanese border conflicts 
Main article: Soviet–Japanese border conflicts
Red Army artillery unit during the Battle of Lake Khasan, 1938
In the mid-to-late 1930s, Japanese forces in Manchukuo had sporadic border clashes with the Soviet Union and Mongolia. The Japanese doctrine of Hokushin-ron, which emphasised Japan's expansion northward, was favoured by the Imperial Army during this time. With the Japanese defeat at Khalkin Gol in 1939, the ongoing Second Sino-Japanese War[52] and ally Nazi Germany pursuing neutrality with the Soviets, this policy would prove difficult to maintain. Japan and the Soviet Union eventually signed a Neutrality Pact in April 1941, and Japan adopted the doctrine of Nanshin-ron, promoted by the Navy, which took its focus southward, eventually leading to its war with the United States and the Western Allies.[53][54]

European occupations and agreements 
Chamberlain, Daladier, Hitler, Mussolini, and Ciano pictured just before signing the Munich Agreement, 29 September 1938
In Europe, Germany and Italy were becoming more aggressive. In March 1938, Germany annexed Austria, again provoking little response from other European powers.[55] Encouraged, Hitler began pressing German claims on the Sudetenland, an area of Czechoslovakia with a predominantly ethnic German population. Soon the United Kingdom and France followed the counsel of British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain and conceded this territory to Germany in the Munich Agreement, which was made against the wishes of the Czechoslovak government, in exchange for a promise of no further territorial demands.[56] Soon afterwards, Germany and Italy forced Czechoslovakia to cede additional territory to Hungary, and Poland annexed Czechoslovakia's Zaolzie region.[57]

Although all of Germany's stated demands had been satisfied by the agreement, privately Hitler was furious that British interference had prevented him from seizing all of Czechoslovakia in one operation. In subsequent speeches Hitler attacked British and Jewish "war-mongers" and in January 1939 secretly ordered a major build-up of the German navy to challenge British naval supremacy. In March 1939, Germany invaded the remainder of Czechoslovakia and subsequently split it into the German Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia and a pro-German client state, the Slovak Republic.[58] Hitler also delivered the 20 March 1939 ultimatum to Lithuania, forcing the concession of the Klaipėda Region.[59]

German Foreign Minister Joachim von Ribbentrop (right) and the Soviet leader Joseph Stalin, after signing the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact, 23 August 1939
Greatly alarmed and with Hitler making further demands on the Free City of Danzig, the United Kingdom and France guaranteed their support for Polish independence; when Italy conquered Albania in April 1939, the same guarantee was extended to Romania and Greece.[60] Shortly after the Franco-British pledge to Poland, Germany and Italy formalised their own alliance with the Pact of Steel.[61] Hitler accused the United Kingdom and Poland of trying to "encircle" Germany and renounced the Anglo-German Naval Agreement and the German–Polish Non-Aggression Pact.[62]

The situation reached a general crisis in late August as German troops continued to mobilise against the Polish border. In August 23, when tripartite negotiations about a military alliance between France, the United Kingdom and Soviet Union stalled,[63] the Soviet Union signed a non-aggression pact with Germany.[64] This pact had a secret protocol that defined German and Soviet "spheres of influence" (western Poland and Lithuania for Germany; eastern Poland, Finland, Estonia, Latvia and Bessarabia for the Soviet Union), and raised the question of continuing Polish independence.[65] The pact neutralized the possibility of Soviet opposition to a campaign against Poland and assured that Germany would not have to face the prospect of a two-front war, as it had in World War I. Immediately after that, Hitler ordered the attack to proceed on 26 August, but upon hearing that the United Kingdom had concluded a formal mutual assistance pact with Poland, and that Italy would maintain neutrality, he decided to delay it.[66]

In response to British requests for direct negotiations to avoid war, Germany made demands on Poland, which only served as a pretext to worsen relations.[67] On 29 August, Hitler demanded that a Polish plenipotentiary immediately travel to Berlin to negotiate the handover of Danzig, and to allow a plebiscite in the Polish Corridor in which the German minority would vote on secession.[67] The Poles refused to comply with the German demands, and on the night of 30–31 August in a stormy meeting with the British ambassador Neville Henderson, Ribbentrop declared that Germany considered its claims rejected.[68]

Course of the war 
Further information: Diplomatic history of World War II
 War breaks out in Europe (1939–40) 
Soldiers of the German Wehrmacht tearing down the border crossing into Poland, 1 September 1939
On 1 September 1939, Germany invaded Poland after having staged several false flag border incidents as a pretext to initiate the attack.[69] The Battle of Westerplatte is often described as the first battle of the war.[70] The United Kingdom responded with an ultimatum to Germany to cease military operations, and on 3 September, after the ultimatum was ignored, France, the United Kingdom, Australia, and New Zealand declared war on Germany. This alliance was joined by South Africa (6 September) and Canada (10 September). The alliance provided no direct military support to Poland, outside of a cautious French probe into the Saarland.[71] The Western Allies also began a naval blockade of Germany, which aimed to damage the country's economy and war effort.[72] Germany responded by ordering U-boat warfare against Allied merchant and warships, which would later escalate into the Battle of the Atlantic.[73]

Soldiers of the Polish Army during the defence of Poland, September 1939
On 8 September, German troops reached the suburbs of Warsaw. The Polish counter offensive to the west halted the German advance for several days, but it was outflanked and encircled by the Wehrmacht. Remnants of the Polish army broke through to besieged Warsaw. On 17 September 1939, after signing a cease-fire with Japan, the Soviets invaded Eastern Poland[74] under a pretext that the Polish state had ostensibly ceased to exist.[75] On 27 September, the Warsaw garrison surrendered to the Germans, and the last large operational unit of the Polish Army surrendered on 6 October. Despite the military defeat, Poland never surrendered, instead forming the Polish government-in-exile and a stay-behind clandestine state apparatus in occupied Poland.[76] A significant part of Polish military personnel evacuated to Romania and the Baltic countries; many of them would fight against the Axis in other theatres of the war.[77]

Germany annexed the western and occupied the central part of Poland, and the Soviet Union annexed its eastern part; small shares of Polish territory were transferred to Lithuania and Slovakia. On 6 October, Hitler made a public peace overture to the United Kingdom and France, but said that the future of Poland was to be determined exclusively by Germany and the Soviet Union. The proposal was rejected,[68] and Hitler ordered an immediate offensive against France,[78] which would be postponed until the spring of 1940 due to bad weather.[79][80][81]

Finnish machine gun nest aimed at Soviet Red Army positions during the Winter War, February 1940
The Soviet Union forced the Baltic countries—Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, the states that were in the Soviet "sphere of influence" under the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact—to sign "mutual assistance pacts" that stipulated stationing Soviet troops in these countries. Soon after, significant Soviet military contingents were moved there.[82][83][84] Finland refused to sign a similar pact and rejected ceding part of its territory to the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union invaded Finland in November 1939,[85] and the Soviet Union was expelled from the League of Nations.[86] Despite overwhelming numerical superiority, Soviet military success was modest, and the Finno-Soviet war ended in March 1940 with minimal Finnish concessions.[87]

In June 1940, the Soviet Union forcibly annexed Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania,[83] and the disputed Romanian regions of Bessarabia, Northern Bukovina and Hertza. Meanwhile, Nazi-Soviet political rapprochement and economic co-operation[88][89] gradually stalled,[90][91] and both states began preparations for war.[92]

 Western Europe (1940–41) 
Main article: Western Front (World War II)
German advance into Belgium and Northern France, 10 May-4 June 1940, swept past the Maginot Line (shown in dark red)
In April 1940, Germany invaded Denmark and Norway to protect shipments of iron ore from Sweden, which the Allies were attempting to cut off.[93] Denmark capitulated after a few hours, and Norway was conquered within two months[94] despite Allied support. British discontent over the Norwegian campaign led to the appointment of Winston Churchill as Prime Minister on 10  May 1940.[95]

On the same day, Germany launched an offensive against France. To circumvent the strong Maginot Line fortifications on the Franco-German border, Germany directed its attack at the neutral nations of Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg.[96] The Germans carried out a flanking manoeuvre through the Ardennes region,[97] which was mistakenly perceived by Allies as an impenetrable natural barrier against armoured vehicles.[98][99] By successfully implementing new blitzkrieg tactics, the Wehrmacht rapidly advanced to the Channel and cut off the Allied forces in Belgium, trapping the bulk of the Allied armies in a cauldron on the Franco-Belgian border near Lille. The United Kingdom was able to evacuate a significant number of Allied troops from the continent by early June, although abandoning almost all of their equipment.[100]

On 10 June, Italy invaded France, declaring war on both France and the United Kingdom.[101] The Germans turned south against the weakened French army, and Paris fell to them on 14  June. Eight days later France signed an armistice with Germany; it was divided into German and Italian occupation zones,[102] and an unoccupied rump state under the Vichy Regime, which, though officially neutral, was generally aligned with Germany. France kept its fleet, which the United Kingdom attacked on 3  July in an attempt to prevent its seizure by Germany.[103]

London seen from St. Paul's Cathedral after the German Blitz, 29 December 1940
The Battle of Britain[104] began in early July with Luftwaffe attacks on shipping and harbours.[105] The United Kingdom rejected Hitler's ultimatum,[106] and the German air superiority campaign started in August but failed to defeat RAF Fighter Command. Due to this the proposed German invasion of Britain was postponed indefinitely on 17  September. The German strategic bombing offensive intensified with night attacks on London and other cities in the Blitz, but failed to significantly disrupt the British war effort[105] and largely ended in May 1941.[107]

Using newly captured French ports, the German Navy enjoyed success against an over-extended Royal Navy, using U-boats against British shipping in the Atlantic.[108] The British Home Fleet scored a significant victory on 27  May 1941 by sinking the German battleship Bismarck.[109]

In November 1939, the United States was taking measures to assist China and the Western Allies, and amended the Neutrality Act to allow "cash and carry" purchases by the Allies.[110] In 1940, following the German capture of Paris, the size of the United States Navy was significantly increased. In September the United States further agreed to a trade of American destroyers for British bases.[111] Still, a large majority of the American public continued to oppose any direct military intervention in the conflict well into 1941.[112] In December 1940 Roosevelt accused Hitler of planning world conquest and ruled out any negotiations as useless, calling for the United States to become an "arsenal of democracy" and promoting Lend-Lease programmes of aid to support the British war effort.[106] The United States started strategic planning to prepare for a full-scale offensive against Germany.[113]

At the end of September 1940, the Tripartite Pact formally united Japan, Italy and Germany as the Axis Powers. The Tripartite Pact stipulated that any country, with the exception of the Soviet Union, which attacked any Axis Power would be forced to go to war against all three.[114] The Axis expanded in November 1940 when Hungary, Slovakia and Romania joined.[115] Romania and Hungary would make major contributions to the Axis war against the Soviet Union, in Romania's case partially to recapture territory ceded to the Soviet Union.[116]

 Mediterranean (1940–41) 
Main article: Mediterranean and Middle East theatre of World War II
Soldiers of the British Commonwealth forces from the Australian Army's 9th Division during the Siege of Tobruk; North African Campaign, August 1941
In early June 1940 the Italian Regia aeronautica attacked and besieged Malta, a British possession. In late summer through early autumn Italy conquered British Somaliland and made an incursion into British-held Egypt. In October Italy attacked Greece, but the attack was repulsed with heavy Italian casualties; the campaign ended within days with minor territorial changes.[117] Germany started preparation for an invasion of the Balkans to assist Italy, to prevent the British from gaining a foothold there, which would be a potential threat for Romanian oil fields, and to strike against the British dominance of the Mediterranean.[118]

In December 1940, British Empire forces began counter-offensives against Italian forces in Egypt and Italian East Africa.[119] The offensives were highly successful; by early February 1941 Italy had lost control of eastern Libya, and large numbers of Italian troops had been taken prisoner. The Italian Navy also suffered significant defeats, with the Royal Navy putting three Italian battleships out of commission by a carrier attack at Taranto and neutralising several more warships at the Battle of Cape Matapan.[120]

German panzers of the Afrika Korps advancing across the North African desert, 1941
Italian defeats prompted Germany to deploy an expeditionary force to North Africa, and at the end of March 1941 Rommel's Afrika Korps launched an offensive which drove back the Commonwealth forces.[121] In under a month, Axis forces advanced to western Egypt and besieged the port of Tobruk.[122]

By late March 1941 Bulgaria and Yugoslavia signed the Tripartite Pact. However, the Yugoslav government was overthrown two days later by pro-British nationalists. Germany responded with simultaneous invasions of both Yugoslavia and Greece, commencing on 6 April 1941; both nations were forced to surrender within the month.[123] The airborne invasion of the Greek island of Crete at the end of May completed the German conquest of the Balkans.[124] Although the Axis victory was swift, bitter and large-scale partisan warfare subsequently broke out against the Axis occupation of Yugoslavia, which continued until the end of the war.[125]

In the Middle East, in May Commonwealth forces quashed an uprising in Iraq which had been supported by German aircraft from bases within Vichy-controlled Syria.[126] Between June and July they invaded and occupied the French possessions Syria and Lebanon, with the assistance of the Free French.[citation needed ]

 Axis attack on the Soviet Union (1941) 
Main article: Eastern Front (World War II)
European theatre of World War II animation map, 1939–1945 – Red: Western Allies and Soviet Union after 1941; Green: Soviet Union before 1941; Blue: Axis powers
With the situation in Europe and Asia relatively stable, Germany, Japan, and the Soviet Union made preparations. With the Soviets wary of mounting tensions with Germany and the Japanese planning to take advantage of the European War by seizing resource-rich European possessions in Southeast Asia, the two powers signed the Soviet–Japanese Neutrality Pact in April 1941.[127] By contrast, the Germans were steadily making preparations for an attack on the Soviet Union, massing forces on the Soviet border.[128]

Hitler believed that the United Kingdom's refusal to end the war was based on the hope that the United States and the Soviet Union would enter the war against Germany sooner or later.[129] He therefore decided to try to strengthen Germany's relations with the Soviets, or failing that to attack and eliminate them as a factor. In November 1940, negotiations took place to determine if the Soviet Union would join the Tripartite Pact. The Soviets showed some interest, but asked for concessions from Finland, Bulgaria, Turkey, and Japan that Germany considered unacceptable. On 18 December 1940, Hitler issued the directive to prepare for an invasion of the Soviet Union.[130]

German soldiers during the invasion of the Soviet Union by the Axis powers, 1941
On 22 June 1941, Germany, supported by Italy and Romania, invaded the Soviet Union in Operation Barbarossa, with Germany accusing the Soviets of plotting against them. They were joined shortly by Finland and Hungary.[131] The primary targets of this surprise offensive[132] were the Baltic region, Moscow and Ukraine, with the ultimate goal of ending the 1941 campaign near the Arkhangelsk-Astrakhan line, from the Caspian to the White Seas. Hitler's objectives were to eliminate the Soviet Union as a military power, exterminate Communism, generate Lebensraum ("living space")[133] by dispossessing the native population[134] and guarantee access to the strategic resources needed to defeat Germany's remaining rivals.[135]

Although the Red Army was preparing for strategic counter-offensives before the war,[136] Barbarossa forced the Soviet supreme command to adopt a strategic defence. During the summer, the Axis made significant gains into Soviet territory, inflicting immense losses in both personnel and materiel. By the middle of August, however, the German Army High Command decided to suspend the offensive of a considerably depleted Army Group Centre, and to divert the 2nd Panzer Group to reinforce troops advancing towards central Ukraine and Leningrad.[137] The Kiev offensive was overwhelmingly successful, resulting in encirclement and elimination of four Soviet armies, and made possible further advance into Crimea and industrially developed Eastern Ukraine (the First Battle of Kharkov).[138]

Soviet civilians leaving destroyed houses after a German bombardment during the Battle of Leningrad, 10 December 1942
The diversion of three quarters of the Axis troops and the majority of their air forces from France and the central Mediterranean to the Eastern Front[139] prompted the United Kingdom to reconsider its grand strategy.[140] In July, the UK and the Soviet Union formed a military alliance against Germany[141] The British and Soviets invaded neutral Iran to secure the Persian Corridor and Iran's oil fields.[142] In August, the United Kingdom and the United States jointly issued the Atlantic Charter.[143]

By October Axis operational objectives in Ukraine and the Baltic region were achieved, with only the sieges of Leningrad[144] and Sevastopol continuing.[145] A major offensive against Moscow was renewed; after two months of fierce battles in increasingly harsh weather the German army almost reached the outer suburbs of Moscow, where the exhausted troops[146] were forced to suspend their offensive.[147] Large territorial gains were made by Axis forces, but their campaign had failed to achieve its main objectives: two key cities remained in Soviet hands, the Soviet capability to resist was not broken, and the Soviet Union retained a considerable part of its military potential. The blitzkrieg phase of the war in Europe had ended.[148]

By early December, freshly mobilised reserves[149] allowed the Soviets to achieve numerical parity with Axis troops.[150] This, as well as intelligence data which established that a minimal number of Soviet troops in the East would be sufficient to deter any attack by the Japanese Kwantung Army,[151] allowed the Soviets to begin a massive counter-offensive that started on 5 December all along the front and pushed German troops 100–250 kilometres (62–155 mi) west.[152]

 War breaks out in the Pacific (1941) 
Main article: Pacific War
In 1939, the United States had renounced its trade treaty with Japan, and beginning with an aviation gasoline ban in July 1940, Japan became subject to increasing economic pressure.[106] During this time, Japan launched its first attack against Changsha, a strategically important Chinese city, but was repulsed by late September.[153] Despite several offensives by both sides, the war between China and Japan was stalemated by 1940. To increase pressure on China by blocking supply routes, and to better position Japanese forces in the event of a war with the Western powers, Japan invaded and occupied northern Indochina.[154] Afterwards, the United States embargoed iron, steel and mechanical parts against Japan.[155]

Chinese nationalist forces launched a large-scale counter-offensive in early 1940. In August, Chinese communists launched an offensive in Central China; in retaliation, Japan instituted harsh measures in occupied areas to reduce human and material resources for the communists.[156] Continued antipathy between Chinese communist and nationalist forces culminated in armed clashes in January 1941, effectively ending their co-operation.[157] In March, the Japanese 11th army attacked the headquarters of the Chinese 19th army but was repulsed during Battle of Shanggao.[158] In September, Japan attempted to take the city of Changsha again and clashed with Chinese nationalist forces.[159]

Mitsubishi A6M2 "Zero" fighters on the Imperial Japanese Navy aircraft carrier Shōkaku, just before the attack on Pearl Harbor
German successes in Europe encouraged Japan to increase pressure on European governments in Southeast Asia. The Dutch government agreed to provide Japan some oil supplies from the Dutch East Indies, but negotiations for additional access to their resources ended in failure in June 1941.[160] In July 1941 Japan sent troops to southern Indochina, thus threatening British and Dutch possessions in the Far East. The United States, United Kingdom and other Western governments reacted to this move with a freeze on Japanese assets and a total oil embargo.[161][162] At the same time, Japan was planning an invasion of the Soviet Far East, intending to capitalise off the German invasion in the west, but abandoned the operation after the sanctions.[163]

Since early 1941 the United States and Japan had been engaged in negotiations in an attempt to improve their strained relations and end the war in China. During these negotiations Japan advanced a number of proposals which were dismissed by the Americans as inadequate.[164] At the same time the United States, the United Kingdom, and the Netherlands engaged in secret discussions for the joint defence of their territories, in the event of a Japanese attack against any of them.[165] Roosevelt reinforced the Philippines (an American protectorate scheduled for independence in 1946) and warned Japan that the United States would react to Japanese attacks against any "neighboring countries".[165]

The USS Arizona was a total loss in the Japanese surprise air attack on the American Pacific Fleet at Pearl Harbor, 7 December 1941
Frustrated at the lack of progress and feeling the pinch of the American-British-Dutch sanctions, Japan prepared for war. On 20 November a new government under Hideki Tojo presented an interim proposal as its final offer. It called for the end of American aid to China and for lifting the embargo on the supply of oil and other resources to Japan. In exchange Japan promised not to launch any attacks in Southeast Asia and to withdraw its forces from southern Indochina.[164] The American counter-proposal of 26 November required that Japan evacuate all of China without conditions and conclude non-aggression pacts with all Pacific powers.[166] That meant Japan was essentially forced to choose between abandoning its ambitions in China, or seizing the natural resources it needed in the Dutch East Indies by force;[167][168] the Japanese military did not consider the former an option, and many officers considered the oil embargo an unspoken declaration of war.[169]

Japan planned to rapidly seize European colonies in Asia to create a large defensive perimeter stretching into the Central Pacific. The Japanese would then be free to exploit the resources of Southeast Asia while exhausting the over-stretched Allies by fighting a defensive war.[170][171] To prevent American intervention while securing the perimeter, it was further planned to neutralise the United States Pacific Fleet and the American military presence in the Philippines from the outset.[172] On 7 December 1941 (8 December in Asian time zones), Japan attacked British and American holdings with near-simultaneous offensives against Southeast Asia and the Central Pacific.[173] These included an attack on the American fleets at Pearl Harbor and the Philippines, landings in Thailand and Malaya,[173] and the Battle of Hong Kong.[citation needed ]

These attacks led the United States, United Kingdom, China, Australia and several other states to formally declare war on Japan, whereas the Soviet Union, being heavily involved in large-scale hostilities with European Axis countries, maintained its neutrality agreement with Japan.[174] Germany, followed by the other Axis states, declared war on the United States[175] in solidarity with Japan, citing as justification the American attacks on German war vessels that had been ordered by Roosevelt.[131][176]

 Axis advance stalls (1942–43) 
US President Franklin D. Roosevelt and British PM Winston Churchill seated at the Casablanca Conference, January 1943
On 1 January 1942, the Allied Big Four[177]—the Soviet Union, China, the United Kingdom and the United States—and 22 smaller or exiled governments issued the Declaration by United Nations, thereby affirming the Atlantic Charter,[178] and agreeing to not to sign a separate peace with the Axis powers.[179]

During 1942, Allied officials debated on the appropriate grand strategy to pursue. All agreed that defeating Germany was the primary objective. The Americans favoured a straightforward, large-scale attack on Germany through France. The Soviets were also demanding a second front. The British, on the other hand, argued that military operations should target peripheral areas to wear out German strength, leading to increasing demoralisation, and bolster resistance forces. Germany itself would be subject to a heavy bombing campaign. An offensive against Germany would then be launched primarily by Allied armour without using large-scale armies.[180] Eventually, the British persuaded the Americans that a landing in France was infeasible in 1942 and they should instead focus on driving the Axis out of North Africa.[181]

At the Casablanca Conference in early 1943, the Allies reiterated the statements issued in the 1942 Declaration, and demanded the unconditional surrender of their enemies. The British and Americans agreed to continue to press the initiative in the Mediterranean by invading Sicily to fully secure the Mediterranean supply routes.[182] Although the British argued for further operations in the Balkans to bring Turkey into the war, in May 1943, the Americans extracted a British commitment to limit Allied operations in the Mediterranean to an invasion of the Italian mainland and to invade France in 1944.[183]

 Pacific (1942–43) 
Map of Japanese military advances through mid-1942
By the end of April 1942, Japan and its ally Thailand had almost fully conquered Burma, Malaya, the Dutch East Indies, Singapore, and Rabaul, inflicting severe losses on Allied troops and taking a large number of prisoners.[184] Despite stubborn resistance by Filipino and US forces, the Philippine Commonwealth was eventually captured in May 1942, forcing its government into exile.[185] On 16 April, in Burma, 7,000 British soldiers were encircled by the Japanese 33rd Division during the Battle of Yenangyaung and rescued by the Chinese 38th Division.[186] Japanese forces also achieved naval victories in the South China Sea, Java Sea and Indian Ocean,[187] and bombed the Allied naval base at Darwin, Australia. In January 1942, the only Allied success against Japan was a Chinese victory at Changsha.[188] These easy victories over unprepared US and European opponents left Japan overconfident, as well as overextended.[189]

In early May 1942, Japan initiated operations to capture Port Moresby by amphibious assault and thus sever communications and supply lines between the United States and Australia. The planned invasion was thwarted when an Allied task force, centred on two American fleet carriers, fought Japanese naval forces to a draw in the Battle of the Coral Sea.[190] Japan's next plan, motivated by the earlier Doolittle Raid, was to seize Midway Atoll and lure American carriers into battle to be eliminated; as a diversion, Japan would also send forces to occupy the Aleutian Islands in Alaska.[191] In mid-May, Japan started the Zhejiang-Jiangxi Campaign in China, with the goal of inflicting retribution on the Chinese who aided the surviving American airmen in the Doolittle Raid by destroying air bases and fighting against the Chinese 23rd and 32nd Army Groups.[192][193] In early June, Japan put its operations into action, but the Americans, having broken Japanese naval codes in late May, were fully aware of the plans and order of battle, and used this knowledge to achieve a decisive victory at Midway over the Imperial Japanese Navy.[194]

US Marines during the Guadalcanal Campaign, in the Pacific theatre, 1942
With its capacity for aggressive action greatly diminished as a result of the Midway battle, Japan chose to focus on a belated attempt to capture Port Moresby by an overland campaign in the Territory of Papua.[195] The Americans planned a counter-attack against Japanese positions in the southern Solomon Islands, primarily Guadalcanal, as a first step towards capturing Rabaul, the main Japanese base in Southeast Asia.[196]

Both plans started in July, but by mid-September, the Battle for Guadalcanal took priority for the Japanese, and troops in New Guinea were ordered to withdraw from the Port Moresby area to the northern part of the island, where they faced Australian and United States troops in the Battle of Buna-Gona.[197] Guadalcanal soon became a focal point for both sides with heavy commitments of troops and ships in the battle for Guadalcanal. By the start of 1943, the Japanese were defeated on the island and withdrew their troops.[198] In Burma, Commonwealth forces mounted two operations. The first, an offensive into the Arakan region in late 1942, went disastrously, forcing a retreat back to India by May 1943.[199] The second was the insertion of irregular forces behind Japanese front-lines in February which, by the end of April, had achieved mixed results.[200]

 Eastern Front (1942–43) 
Red Army soldiers on the counterattack during the Battle of Stalingrad, February 1943
Despite considerable losses, in early 1942 Germany and its allies stopped a major Soviet offensive in central and southern Russia, keeping most territorial gains they had achieved during the previous year.[201] In May the Germans defeated Soviet offensives in the Kerch Peninsula and at Kharkov,[202] and then launched their main summer offensive against southern Russia in June 1942, to seize the oil fields of the Caucasus and occupy Kuban steppe, while maintaining positions on the northern and central areas of the front. The Germans split Army Group South into two groups: Army Group A advanced to the lower Don River and struck south-east to the Caucasus, while Army Group B headed towards the Volga River. The Soviets decided to make their stand at Stalingrad on the Volga.[203]

By mid-November, the Germans had nearly taken Stalingrad in bitter street fighting. The Soviets began their second winter counter-offensive, starting with an encirclement of German forces at Stalingrad,[204] and an assault on the Rzhev salient near Moscow, though the latter failed disastrously.[205] By early February 1943, the German Army had taken tremendous losses; German troops at Stalingrad had been forced to surrender,[206] and the front-line had been pushed back beyond its position before the summer offensive. In mid-February, after the Soviet push had tapered off, the Germans launched another attack on Kharkov, creating a salient in their front line around the Soviet city of Kursk.[207]

 Western Europe/Atlantic and Mediterranean (1942–43) 
American 8th Air Force Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress bombing raid on the Focke-Wulf factory in Germany, 9 October 1943
Exploiting poor American naval command decisions, the German navy ravaged Allied shipping off the American Atlantic coast.[208] By November 1941, Commonwealth forces had launched a counter-offensive, Operation Crusader, in North Africa, and reclaimed all the gains the Germans and Italians had made.[209] In North Africa, the Germans launched an offensive in January, pushing the British back to positions at the Gazala Line by early February,[210] followed by a temporary lull in combat which Germany used to prepare for their upcoming offensives.[211] Concerns the Japanese might use bases in Vichy-held Madagascar caused the British to invade the island in early May 1942.[212] An Axis offensive in Libya forced an Allied retreat deep inside Egypt until Axis forces were stopped at El Alamein.[213] On the Continent, raids of Allied commandos on strategic targets, culminating in the disastrous Dieppe Raid,[214] demonstrated the Western Allies' inability to launch an invasion of continental Europe without much better preparation, equipment, and operational security.[215][page needed ]

In August 1942, the Allies succeeded in repelling a second attack against El Alamein[216] and, at a high cost, managed to deliver desperately needed supplies to the besieged Malta.[217] A few months later, the Allies commenced an attack of their own in Egypt, dislodging the Axis forces and beginning a drive west across Libya.[218] This attack was followed up shortly after by Anglo-American landings in French North Africa, which resulted in the region joining the Allies.[219] Hitler responded to the French colony's defection by ordering the occupation of Vichy France;[219] although Vichy forces did not resist this violation of the armistice, they managed to scuttle their fleet to prevent its capture by German forces.[219][220] The Axis forces in Africa withdrew into Tunisia, which was conquered by the Allies in May 1943.[219][221]

In June 1943 the British and Americans began a strategic bombing campaign against Germany with a goal to disrupt the war economy, reduce morale, and "de-house" the civilian population.[222] The firebombing of Hamburg was among the first attacks in this campaign, inflicting significant casualties and considerable losses on infrastructure of this important industrial centre.[223]

 Allies gain momentum (1943–44) 
U.S. Navy SBD-5 scout plane flies patrol over USS Washington and USS Lexington during the Gilbert and Marshall Islands campaign, 1943
After the Guadalcanal Campaign, the Allies initiated several operations against Japan in the Pacific. In May 1943, Canadian and US forces were sent to eliminate Japanese forces from the Aleutians.[224] Soon after, the United States, with support from Australian and New Zealand forces, began major operations to isolate Rabaul by capturing surrounding islands, and breach the Japanese Central Pacific perimeter at the Gilbert and Marshall Islands.[225] By the end of March 1944, the Allies had completed both of these objectives, and had also neutralised the major Japanese base at Truk in the Caroline Islands. In April, the Allies launched an operation to retake Western New Guinea.[226]

In the Soviet Union, both the Germans and the Soviets spent the spring and early summer of 1943 preparing for large offensives in central Russia. On 4 July 1943, Germany attacked Soviet forces around the Kursk Bulge. Within a week, German forces had exhausted themselves against the Soviets' deeply echeloned and well-constructed defences,[227] and for the first time in the war Hitler cancelled the operation before it had achieved tactical or operational success.[228] This decision was partially affected by the Western Allies' invasion of Sicily launched on 9 July, which, combined with previous Italian failures, resulted in the ousting and arrest of Mussolini later that month.[229]

Red Army troops in a counter-offensive on German positions at the Battle of Kursk, July 1943
On 12 July 1943, the Soviets launched their own counter-offensives, thereby dispelling any chance of German victory or even stalemate in the east. The Soviet victory at Kursk marked the end of German superiority,[230] giving the Soviet Union the initiative on the Eastern Front.[231][232] The Germans tried to stabilise their eastern front along the hastily fortified Panther–Wotan line, but the Soviets broke through it at Smolensk and by the Lower Dnieper Offensives.[233]

On 3 September 1943, the Western Allies invaded the Italian mainland, following Italy's armistice with the Allies.[234] Germany with the help of fascists responded by disarming Italian forces that were in many places without superior orders, seizing military control of Italian areas,[235] and creating a series of defensive lines.[236] German special forces then rescued Mussolini, who then soon established a new client state in German-occupied Italy named the Italian Social Republic,[237] causing an Italian civil war. The Western Allies fought through several lines until reaching the main German defensive line in mid-November.[238]

German operations in the Atlantic also suffered. By May 1943, as Allied counter-measures became increasingly effective, the resulting sizeable German submarine losses forced a temporary halt of the German Atlantic naval campaign.[239] In November 1943, Franklin D. Roosevelt and Winston Churchill met with Chiang Kai-shek in Cairo and then with Joseph Stalin in Tehran.[240] The former conference determined the post-war return of Japanese territory[241] and the military planning for the Burma Campaign,[242] while the latter included agreement that the Western Allies would invade Europe in 1944 and that the Soviet Union would declare war on Japan within three months of Germany's defeat.[243]

Ruins of the Benedictine monastery, during the Battle of Monte Cassino, Italian Campaign, May 1944
From November 1943, during the seven-week Battle of Changde, the Chinese forced Japan to fight a costly war of attrition, while awaiting Allied relief.[244][245][246] In January 1944, the Allies launched a series of attacks in Italy against the line at Monte Cassino and tried to outflank it with landings at Anzio.[247]

On 27 January 1944, Soviet troops launched a major offensive that expelled German forces from the Leningrad region, thereby ending the longest and most lethal siege in history.[248] The following Soviet offensive was halted on the pre-war Estonian border by the German Army Group North aided by Estonians hoping to re-establish national independence. This delay slowed subsequent Soviet operations in the Baltic Sea region.[249] By late May 1944, the Soviets had liberated Crimea, largely expelled Axis forces from Ukraine, and made incursions into Romania, which were repulsed by the Axis troops.[250] The Allied offensives in Italy had succeeded and, at the expense of allowing several German divisions to retreat, on 4 June, Rome was captured.[251]

The Allies had mixed success in mainland Asia. In March 1944, the Japanese launched the first of two invasions, an operation against British positions in Assam, India,[252] and soon besieged Commonwealth positions at Imphal and Kohima.[253] In May 1944, British forces mounted a counter-offensive that drove Japanese troops back to Burma by July,[253] and Chinese forces that had invaded northern Burma in late 1943 besieged Japanese troops in Myitkyina.[254] The second Japanese invasion of China aimed to destroy China's main fighting forces, secure railways between Japanese-held territory and capture Allied airfields.[255] By June, the Japanese had conquered the province of Henan and begun a new attack on Changsha in Hunan province.[256]

 Allies close in (1944) 
American troops approaching Omaha Beach, during the invasion of Normandy on D-Day, 6 June 1944
On 6 June 1944 (known as D-Day), after three years of Soviet pressure,[257] the Western Allies invaded northern France. After reassigning several Allied divisions from Italy, they also attacked southern France.[258] These landings were successful, and led to the defeat of the German Army units in France. Paris was liberated on 25 August by the local resistance assisted by the Free French Forces, both led by General Charles de Gaulle,[259] and the Western Allies continued to push back German forces in western Europe during the latter part of the year. An attempt to advance into northern Germany spearheaded by a major airborne operation in the Netherlands failed.[260] After that, the Western Allies slowly pushed into Germany, but failed to cross the Ruhr river in a large offensive. In Italy, Allied advance also slowed due to the last major German defensive line.[261]

German SS soldiers from the Dirlewanger Brigade, tasked with suppressing the Warsaw Uprising against Nazi occupation, August 1944
On 22 June, the Soviets launched a strategic offensive in Belarus ("Operation Bagration") that destroyed the German Army Group Centre almost completely.[262] Soon after that, another Soviet strategic offensive forced German troops from Western Ukraine and Eastern Poland. The Soviets formed the Polish Committee of National Liberation to control territory in Poland and combat the Polish Armia Krajowa; The Soviet Red Army remained in the Praga district on the other side of the Vistula and watched passively as the Germans quelled the Warsaw Uprising initiated by the Armia Krajowa.[263] The national uprising in Slovakia was also quelled by the Germans.[citation needed ] The Soviet Red Army's strategic offensive in eastern Romania cut off and destroyed the considerable German troops there and triggered a successful coup d'état in Romania and in Bulgaria, followed by those countries' shift to the Allied side.[264]

In September 1944, Soviet troops advanced into Yugoslavia and forced the rapid withdrawal of German Army Groups E and F in Greece, Albania and Yugoslavia to rescue them from being cut off.[265] By this point, the Communist-led Partisans under Marshal Josip Broz Tito, who had led an increasingly successful guerrilla campaign against the occupation since 1941, controlled much of the territory of Yugoslavia and engaged in delaying efforts against German forces further south. In northern Serbia, the Soviet Red Army, with limited support from Bulgarian forces, assisted the Partisans in a joint liberation of the capital city of Belgrade on 20 October. A few days later, the Soviets launched a massive assault against German-occupied Hungary that lasted until the fall of Budapest in February 1945.[266] Unlike impressive Soviet victories in the Balkans, bitter Finnish resistance to the Soviet offensive in the Karelian Isthmus denied the Soviets occupation of Finland and led to a Soviet-Finnish armistice on relatively mild conditions,[267] although Finland was forced to fight their former ally Germany.[268]

General Douglas MacArthur returns to the Philippines, during the Battle of Leyte, 20 October 1944
By the start of July 1944, Commonwealth forces in Southeast Asia had repelled the Japanese sieges in Assam, pushing the Japanese back to the Chindwin River[269] while the Chinese captured Myitkyina. In September 1944, Chinese forces captured Mount Song and reopened the Burma Road.[270] In China, the Japanese had more successes, having finally captured Changsha in mid-June and the city of Hengyang by early August.[271] Soon after, they invaded the province of Guangxi, winning major engagements against Chinese forces at Guilin and Liuzhou by the end of November[272] and successfully linking up their forces in China and Indochina by mid-December.[273]

In the Pacific, US forces continued to press back the Japanese perimeter. In mid-June 1944, they began their offensive against the Mariana and Palau islands, and decisively defeated Japanese forces in the Battle of the Philippine Sea. These defeats led to the resignation of the Japanese Prime Minister, Hideki Tojo, and provided the United States with air bases to launch intensive heavy bomber attacks on the Japanese home islands. In late October, American forces invaded the Filipino island of Leyte; soon after, Allied naval forces scored another large victory in the Battle of Leyte Gulf, one of the largest naval battles in history.[274]

 Axis collapse, Allied victory (1944–45) 
Yalta Conference held in February 1945, with Winston Churchill, Franklin D. Roosevelt and Joseph Stalin
On 16 December 1944, Germany made a last attempt on the Western Front by using most of its remaining reserves to launch a massive counter-offensive in the Ardennes and along the French–German border to split the Western Allies, encircle large portions of Western Allied troops and capture their primary supply port at Antwerp to prompt a political settlement.[275] By January, the offensive had been repulsed with no strategic objectives fulfilled.[275] In Italy, the Western Allies remained stalemated at the German defensive line. In mid-January 1945, the Soviets and Poles attacked in Poland, pushing from the Vistula to the Oder river in Germany, and overran East Prussia.[276] On 4 February, Soviet, British and US leaders met for the Yalta Conference. They agreed on the occupation of post-war Germany, and on when the Soviet Union would join the war against Japan.[277]

In February, the Soviets entered Silesia and Pomerania, while Western Allies entered western Germany and closed to the Rhine river. By March, the Western Allies crossed the Rhine north and south of the Ruhr, encircling the German Army Group B.[278] In early March, in an attempt to protect its last oil reserves in Hungary and to retake Budapest, Germany launched its last major offensive against Soviet troops near Lake Balaton. In two weeks, the offensive had been repulsed, the Soviets advanced to Vienna, and captured the city. In early April, Soviet troops captured Königsberg, while the Western Allies finally pushed forward in Italy and swept across western Germany capturing Hamburg and Nuremberg. American and Soviet forces met at the Elbe river on 25 April, leaving several unoccupied pockets in southern Germany and around Berlin.

The German Reichstag after its capture by the Allied forces, 3 June 1945
Soviet and Polish forces stormed and captured Berlin in late April. In Italy, German forces surrendered on 29 April. On 30 April, the Reichstag was captured, signalling the military defeat of Nazi Germany,[279] Berlin garrison surrendered on 2 May.

Several changes in leadership occurred during this period. On 12 April, President Roosevelt died and was succeeded by Harry S. Truman. Benito Mussolini was killed by Italian partisans on 28 April.[280] Two days later, Hitler committed suicide in besieged Berlin, and he was succeeded by Grand Admiral Karl Dönitz.[281]

Total and unconditional surrender in Europe was signed on 7 and 8 May, to be effective by the end of 8 May.[282] German Army Group Centre resisted in Prague until 11 May.[283]

In the Pacific theatre, American forces accompanied by the forces of the Philippine Commonwealth advanced in the Philippines, clearing Leyte by the end of April 1945. They landed on Luzon in January 1945 and recaptured Manila in March. Fighting continued on Luzon, Mindanao, and other islands of the Philippines until the end of the war.[284] Meanwhile, the United States Army Air Forces launched a massive firebombing campaign of strategic cities in Japan in an effort to destroy Japanese war industry and civilian morale. A devastating bombing raid on Tokyo of 9–10 March was the deadliest conventional bombing raid in history.[285]

Japanese foreign affairs minister Mamoru Shigemitsu signs the Japanese Instrument of Surrender on board USS Missouri, 2 September 1945
In May 1945, Australian troops landed in Borneo, over-running the oilfields there. British, American, and Chinese forces defeated the Japanese in northern Burma in March, and the British pushed on to reach Rangoon by 3 May.[286] Chinese forces started a counterattack in the Battle of West Hunan that occurred between 6 April and 7 June 1945. American naval and amphibious forces also moved towards Japan, taking Iwo Jima by March, and Okinawa by the end of June.[287] At the same time, American submarines cut off Japanese imports, drastically reducing Japan's ability to supply its overseas forces.[288]

On 11 July, Allied leaders met in Potsdam, Germany. They confirmed earlier agreements about Germany,[289] and the American, British and Chinese governments reiterated the demand for unconditional surrender of Japan, specifically stating that "the alternative for Japan is prompt and utter destruction".[290] During this conference, the United Kingdom held its general election, and Clement Attlee replaced Churchill as Prime Minister.[291]

The call for unconditional surrender was rejected by the Japanese government, which believed it would be capable of negotiating for more favourable surrender terms.[292] In early August, the United States dropped atomic bombs on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Between the two bombings, the Soviets, pursuant to the Yalta agreement, invaded Japanese-held Manchuria and quickly defeated the Kwantung Army, which was the largest Japanese fighting force,[293] thereby persuading previously adamant Imperial Army leaders to accept surrender terms.[294] The Red Army also captured the southern part of Sakhalin Island and the Kuril Islands. On 15 August 1945, Japan surrendered, with the surrender documents finally signed at Tokyo Bay on the deck of the American battleship USS Missouri on 2 September 1945, ending the war.[295]

Aftermath 
Main articles: Aftermath of World War II and Consequences of Nazism
Ruins of Warsaw in January 1945, after the deliberate destruction of the city by the occupying German forces
The Allies established occupation administrations in Austria and Germany. The former became a neutral state, non-aligned with any political bloc. The latter was divided into western and eastern occupation zones controlled by the Western Allies and the Soviet Union. A denazification programme in Germany led to the prosecution of Nazi war criminals in the Nuremberg trials and the removal of ex-Nazis from power, although this policy moved towards amnesty and re-integration of ex-Nazis into West German society.[296]

Germany lost a quarter of its pre-war (1937) territory. Among the eastern territories, Silesia, Neumark and most of Pomerania were taken over by Poland,[297] and East Prussia was divided between Poland and the Soviet Union, followed by the expulsion to Germany of the nine million Germans from these provinces,[298][299] as well as three million Germans from the Sudetenland in Czechoslovakia. By the 1950s, one-fifth of West Germans were refugees from the east. The Soviet Union also took over the Polish provinces east of the Curzon line,[300] from which 2 million Poles were expelled;[299][301] north-east Romania,[302][303] parts of eastern Finland,[304] and the three Baltic states were incorporated into the Soviet Union.[305][306]

Defendants at the Nuremberg trials, where the Allied forces prosecuted prominent members of the political, military, judicial and economic leadership of Nazi Germany for crimes against humanity
In an effort to maintain world peace,[307] the Allies formed the United Nations, which officially came into existence on 24 October 1945,[308] and adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948 as a common standard for all member nations.[309] The great powers that were the victors of the war—France, China, the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union and the United States—became the permanent members of the UN's Security Council.[8] The five permanent members remain so to the present, although there have been two seat changes, between the Republic of China and the People's Republic of China in 1971, and between the Soviet Union and its successor state, the Russian Federation, following the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991. The alliance between the Western Allies and the Soviet Union had begun to deteriorate even before the war was over.[310]

Post-war border changes in Central Europe and creation of the Eastern Bloc
Germany had been de facto divided, and two independent states, the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic,[311] were created within the borders of Allied and Soviet occupation zones. The rest of Europe was also divided into Western and Soviet spheres of influence.[312] Most eastern and central European countries fell into the Soviet sphere, which led to establishment of Communist-led regimes, with full or partial support of the Soviet occupation authorities. As a result, East Germany,[313] Poland, Hungary, Romania, Czechoslovakia, and Albania[314] became Soviet satellite states. Communist Yugoslavia conducted a fully independent policy, causing tension with the Soviet Union.[315]

Post-war division of the world was formalised by two international military alliances, the United States-led NATO and the Soviet-led Warsaw Pact.[316] The long period of political tensions and military competition between them, the Cold War, would be accompanied by an unprecedented arms race and proxy wars.[317]

In Asia, the United States led the occupation of Japan and administrated Japan's former islands in the Western Pacific, while the Soviets annexed Sakhalin and the Kuril Islands.[318] Korea, formerly under Japanese rule, was divided and occupied by the Soviet Union in the North and the United States in the South between 1945 and 1948. Separate republics emerged on both sides of the 38th parallel in 1948, each claiming to be the legitimate government for all of Korea, which led ultimately to the Korean War.[319]

David Ben-Gurion proclaiming the Israeli Declaration of Independence at the Independence Hall, 14 May 1948
In China, nationalist and communist forces resumed the civil war in June 1946. Communist forces were victorious and established the People's Republic of China on the mainland, while nationalist forces retreated to Taiwan in 1949.[320] In the Middle East, the Arab rejection of the United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine and the creation of Israel marked the escalation of the Arab–Israeli conflict. While European powers attempted to retain some or all of their colonial empires, their losses of prestige and resources during the war rendered this unsuccessful, leading to decolonisation.[321][322]

The global economy suffered heavily from the war, although participating nations were affected differently. The United States emerged much richer than any other nation, leading to a baby boom, and by 1950 its gross domestic product per person was much higher than that of any of the other powers, and it dominated the world economy.[323] The UK and US pursued a policy of industrial disarmament in Western Germany in the years 1945–1948.[324] Because of international trade interdependencies this led to European economic stagnation and delayed European recovery for several years.[325][326]

Recovery began with the mid-1948 currency reform in Western Germany, and was sped up by the liberalisation of European economic policy that the Marshall Plan (1948–1951) both directly and indirectly caused.[327][328] The post-1948 West German recovery has been called the German economic miracle.[329] Italy also experienced an economic boom[330] and the French economy rebounded.[331] By contrast, the United Kingdom was in a state of economic ruin,[332] and although receiving a quarter of the total Marshall Plan assistance, more than any other European country,[333] it continued in relative economic decline for decades.[334]

The Soviet Union, despite enormous human and material losses, also experienced rapid increase in production in the immediate post-war era.[335] Japan experienced incredibly rapid economic growth, becoming one of the most powerful economies in the world by the 1980s.[336] China returned to its pre-war industrial production by 1952.[337]

Impact 
Main article: Historiography of World War II
Casualties and war crimes 
Main articles: World War II casualties and List of war crimes § 1939–1945: World War II
World War II deaths
Estimates for the total number of casualties in the war vary, because many deaths went unrecorded. Most suggest that some 60 million people died in the war, including about 20 million military personnel and 40 million civilians.[338][339][340] Many of the civilians died because of deliberate genocide, massacres, mass-bombings, disease, and starvation.[citation needed ]

The Soviet Union lost around 27 million people during the war,[341] 8.7 million military and 19 million civilian deaths.[342] A quarter of the people in the Soviet Union were wounded or killed.[343] Germany sustained 5.3 million military losses, mostly on the Eastern Front and during the final battles in Germany.[344]

Of the total number of deaths in World War II, approximately 85 per cent—mostly Soviet and Chinese—were on the Allied side.[345] Many of these deaths were caused by war crimes committed by German and Japanese forces in occupied territories. An estimated 11[346] to 17 million[347] civilians died as a direct or as an indirect result of Nazi racist policies, including mass killing of around 6 million Jews, along with Roma, homosexuals, at least 1.9 million ethnic Poles[348][349] and millions of other Slavs (including Russians, Ukrainians and Belarusians), and other ethnic and minority groups.[350][347] Between 1941 and 1945, over 200,000 ethnic Serbs, along with gypsies and Jews, were persecuted and murdered by the Axis-aligned Croatian Ustaše in Yugoslavia.[351] Also, over 100,000 Poles were massacred by the Ukrainian Insurgent Army in the Volhynia massacres, between 1943 and 1945.[352] At the same time about 10,000–15,000 Ukrainians were killed by the Polish Home Army and other Polish units, in reprisal attacks.[353]

Chinese civilians being buried alive by soldiers of the Imperial Japanese Army, during the Nanking Massacre, December 1937
In Asia and the Pacific, between 3 million and more than 10 million civilians, mostly Chinese (estimated at 7.5 million[354]), were killed by the Japanese occupation forces.[355] The most infamous Japanese atrocity was the Nanking Massacre, in which fifty to three hundred thousand Chinese civilians were raped and murdered.[356] Mitsuyoshi Himeta reported that 2.7 million casualties occurred during the Sankō Sakusen. General Yasuji Okamura implemented the policy in Heipei and Shantung.[357]

Axis forces employed biological and chemical weapons. The Imperial Japanese Army used a variety of such weapons during its invasion and occupation of China (see Unit 731)[358][359] and in early conflicts against the Soviets.[360] Both the Germans and Japanese tested such weapons against civilians,[361] and sometimes on prisoners of war.[362]

The Soviet Union was responsible for the Katyn massacre of 22,000 Polish officers,[363] and the imprisonment or execution of thousands of political prisoners by the NKVD, along with mass civilian deportations to Siberia, in the Baltic states and eastern Poland annexed by the Red Army.[364]

The mass-bombing of cities in Europe and Asia has often been called a war crime, although no positive or specific customary international humanitarian law with respect to aerial warfare existed before or during World War II.[365] The USAAF firebombed a total of 67 Japanese cities, killing 393,000 civilians and destroying 65% of built-up areas.[366]

 Genocide, concentration camps, and slave labour 
Main articles: Genocide, The Holocaust, Nazi concentration camps, Extermination camp, Forced labour under German rule during World War II, Kidnapping of children by Nazi Germany, and Nazi human experimentation
Schutzstaffel (SS) female camp guards remove prisoners' bodies from lorries and carry them to a mass grave, inside the German Bergen-Belsen concentration camp, 1945
Nazi Germany was responsible for the Holocaust (killing approximately 6 million Jews), as well as for killing 2.7 million ethnic Poles[367] and 4 million others who were deemed "unworthy of life" (including the disabled and mentally ill, Soviet prisoners of war, Romani, homosexuals, Freemasons, and Jehovah's Witnesses) as part of a programme of deliberate extermination, in effect becoming a "genocidal state".[368] Soviet POWs were kept in especially unbearable conditions, and, although their extermination was not an official goal, 3.6 million Soviet POWs out of 5.7 died in Nazi camps during the war.[369][370] In addition to concentration camps, death camps were created in Nazi Germany to exterminate people at an industrial scale. Nazi Germany extensively used forced labourers; about 12 million Europeans from German occupied countries were abducted and used as a slave work force in German industry, agriculture and war economy.[371]

The Soviet Gulag became a de facto system of deadly camps during 1942–43, when wartime privation and hunger caused numerous deaths of inmates,[372] including foreign citizens of Poland and other countries occupied in 1939–40 by the Soviet Union, as well as Axis POWs.[373] By the end of the war, most Soviet POWs liberated from Nazi camps and many repatriated civilians were detained in special filtration camps where they were subjected to NKVD evaluation, and a significant part of them were sent to the Gulag as real or perceived Nazi collaborators.[374]

Prisoner identity photograph taken by the German SS of a Polish girl deported to Auschwitz. Approximately 230,000 children were held prisoner, and used in forced labor and medical experiments.
Japanese prisoner-of-war camps, many of which were used as labour camps, also had high death rates. The International Military Tribunal for the Far East found the death rate of Western prisoners was 27.1 per cent (for American POWs, 37 per cent),[375] seven times that of POWs under the Germans and Italians.[376] While 37,583 prisoners from the UK, 28,500 from the Netherlands, and 14,473 from the United States were released after the surrender of Japan, the number of Chinese released was only 56.[377]

At least five million Chinese civilians from northern China and Manchukuo were enslaved between 1935 and 1941 by the East Asia Development Board, or Kōain, for work in mines and war industries. After 1942, the number reached 10 million.[378] In Java, between 4 and 10 million rōmusha (Japanese: "manual labourers"), were forced to work by the Japanese military. About 270,000 of these Javanese labourers were sent to other Japanese-held areas in South East Asia, and only 52,000 were repatriated to Java.[379]

Occupation 
Main articles: German-occupied Europe, Resistance during World War II, Collaboration with the Axis Powers, and Nazi plunder
Polish civilians wearing blindfolds photographed just before their execution by German soldiers in Palmiry forest, 1940
In Europe, occupation came under two forms. In Western, Northern, and Central Europe (France, Norway, Denmark, the Low Countries, and the annexed portions of Czechoslovakia) Germany established economic policies through which it collected roughly 69.5 billion reichmarks (27.8 billion US dollars) by the end of the war; this figure does not include the sizeable plunder of industrial products, military equipment, raw materials and other goods.[380] Thus, the income from occupied nations was over 40 per cent of the income Germany collected from taxation, a figure which increased to nearly 40 per cent of total German income as the war went on.[381]

Soviet partisans hanged by the German army. The Russian Academy of Sciences reported in 1995 civilian victims in the Soviet Union at German hands totalled 13.7 million dead, twenty percent of the 68 million persons in the occupied Soviet Union.
In the East, the intended gains of Lebensraum were never attained as fluctuating front-lines and Soviet scorched earth policies denied resources to the German invaders.[382] Unlike in the West, the Nazi racial policy encouraged extreme brutality against what it considered to be the "inferior people" of Slavic descent; most German advances were thus followed by mass executions.[383] Although resistance groups formed in most occupied territories, they did not significantly hamper German operations in either the East[384] or the West[385] until late 1943.

In Asia, Japan termed nations under its occupation as being part of the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere, essentially a Japanese hegemony which it claimed was for purposes of liberating colonised peoples.[386] Although Japanese forces were originally welcomed as liberators from European domination in some territories, their excessive brutality turned local public opinion against them within weeks.[387] During Japan's initial conquest it captured 4,000,000 barrels (640,000 m3) of oil (~5.5×105 tonnes) left behind by retreating Allied forces, and by 1943 was able to get production in the Dutch East Indies up to 50 million barrels (~6.8×10  ^6 t), 76 per cent of its 1940 output rate.[387]

Home fronts and production 
Main articles: Military production during World War II and Home front during World War II
Allied to Axis GDP ratio
In Europe, before the outbreak of the war, the Allies had significant advantages in both population and economics. In 1938, the Western Allies (United Kingdom, France, Poland and British Dominions) had a 30 per cent larger population and a 30 per cent higher gross domestic product than the European Axis powers (Germany and Italy); if colonies are included, it then gives the Allies more than a 5:1 advantage in population and nearly 2:1 advantage in GDP.[388] In Asia at the same time, China had roughly six times the population of Japan, but only an 89 per cent higher GDP; this is reduced to three times the population and only a 38 per cent higher GDP if Japanese colonies are included.[388]

The United States provided about two-thirds of all the ordnance used by the Allies in terms of warships, transports, warplanes, artillery, tanks, trucks, and ammunition.[389] Though the Allies' economic and population advantages were largely mitigated during the initial rapid blitzkrieg attacks of Germany and Japan, they became the decisive factor by 1942, after the United States and Soviet Union joined the Allies, as the war largely settled into one of attrition.[390] While the Allies' ability to out-produce the Axis is often attributed to the Allies having more access to natural resources, other factors, such as Germany and Japan's reluctance to employ women in the labour force,[391] Allied strategic bombing,[392] and Germany's late shift to a war economy[393] contributed significantly. Additionally, neither Germany nor Japan planned to fight a protracted war, and were not equipped to do so.[394] To improve their production, Germany and Japan used millions of slave labourers;[395] Germany used about 12 million people, mostly from Eastern Europe,[371] while Japan used more than 18 million people in Far East Asia.[378][379]

Advances in technology and warfare 
Main article: Technology during World War II
B-29 Superfortress strategic bombers on the Boeing assembly line in Wichita, Kansas, 1944
Aircraft were used for reconnaissance, as fighters, bombers, and ground-support, and each role was advanced considerably. Innovation included airlift (the capability to quickly move limited high-priority supplies, equipment, and personnel);[396] and of strategic bombing (the bombing of enemy industrial and population centres to destroy the enemy's ability to wage war).[397] Anti-aircraft weaponry also advanced, including defences such as radar and surface-to-air artillery. The use of the jet aircraft was pioneered and, though late introduction meant it had little impact, it led to jets becoming standard in air forces worldwide.[398] Although guided missiles were being developed, they were not advanced enough to reliably target aircraft until some years after the war.

Advances were made in nearly every aspect of naval warfare, most notably with aircraft carriers and submarines. Although aeronautical warfare had relatively little success at the start of the war, actions at Taranto, Pearl Harbor, and the Coral Sea established the carrier as the dominant capital ship in place of the battleship.[399][400][401] In the Atlantic, escort carriers proved to be a vital part of Allied convoys, increasing the effective protection radius and helping to close the Mid-Atlantic gap.[402] Carriers were also more economical than battleships because of the relatively low cost of aircraft[403] and their not requiring to be as heavily armoured.[404] Submarines, which had proved to be an effective weapon during the First World War,[405] were anticipated by all sides to be important in the second. The British focused development on anti-submarine weaponry and tactics, such as sonar and convoys, while Germany focused on improving its offensive capability, with designs such as the Type VII submarine and wolfpack tactics.[406] Gradually, improving Allied technologies such as the Leigh light, hedgehog, squid, and homing torpedoes proved victorious over the German submarines.[citation needed ]

A V-2 rocket launched from a fixed site in Peenemünde, 21 June 1943
Land warfare changed from the static front lines of trench warfare of World War I, which had relied on improved artillery that outmatched the speed of both infantry and cavalry, to increased mobility and combined arms. The tank, which had been used predominantly for infantry support in the First World War, had evolved into the primary weapon.[407] In the late 1930s, tank design was considerably more advanced than it had been during World War I,[408] and advances continued throughout the war with increases in speed, armour and firepower.[citation needed ] At the start of the war, most commanders thought enemy tanks should be met by tanks with superior specifications.[409] This idea was challenged by the poor performance of the relatively light early tank guns against armour, and German doctrine of avoiding tank-versus-tank combat. This, along with Germany's use of combined arms, were among the key elements of their highly successful blitzkrieg tactics across Poland and France.[407] Many means of destroying tanks, including indirect artillery, anti-tank guns (both towed and self-propelled), mines, short-ranged infantry antitank weapons, and other tanks were used.[409] Even with large-scale mechanisation, infantry remained the backbone of all forces,[410] and throughout the war, most infantry were equipped similarly to World War I.[411] The portable machine gun spread, a notable example being the German MG34, and various submachine guns which were suited to close combat in urban and jungle settings.[411] The assault rifle, a late war development incorporating many features of the rifle and submachine gun, became the standard postwar infantry weapon for most armed forces.[412]

Nuclear Gadget being raised to the top of the detonation "shot tower", at Alamogordo Bombing Range; Trinity nuclear test, New Mexico, July 1945
Most major belligerents attempted to solve the problems of complexity and security involved in using large codebooks for cryptography by designing ciphering machines, the most well known being the German Enigma machine.[413] Development of SIGINT (signals intelligence) and cryptanalysis enabled the countering process of decryption. Notable examples were the Allied decryption of Japanese naval codes[414] and British Ultra, a pioneering method for decoding Enigma benefiting from information given to the United Kingdom by the Polish Cipher Bureau, which had been decoding early versions of Enigma before the war.[415] Another aspect of military intelligence was the use of deception, which the Allies used to great effect, such as in operations Mincemeat and Bodyguard.[414][416]

Other technological and engineering feats achieved during, or as a result of, the war include the world's first programmable computers (Z3, Colossus, and ENIAC), guided missiles and modern rockets, the Manhattan Project's development of nuclear weapons, operations research and the development of artificial harbours and oil pipelines under the English Channel.[citation needed ] Penicillin was first mass-produced and used during the war (see Stabilization and mass production of penicillin).[417]

See also 

     World War II portal 
     War portal 

    Index of World War II articles
    Lists of World War II topics
    Outline of World War II

Notes 

    ^  While various other dates have been proposed as the date on which World War II began or ended, this is the time span most frequently cited. 
    ^  Although open hostilities existed between Japan and China from 1937, neither belligerent formally declared war on the other until after the attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941.[6] 

Citations 

    ^  Gilbert 2001, p. 291. 
    ^  James A. Tyner (2009). War, Violence, and Population: Making the Body Count. The Guilford Press. p. 49. ISBN 978-1-60623-038-1.  
    ^  Sommerville 2008, p. 5 (2011 ed.). 
    ^  "Roots – Non-Jewish Holocaust Victims : The 5,000,000 others". www.bbc.co.uk. BBC – Tyne. Archived from the original on 19 October 2017. Retrieved 27 August  2017 .  
    ^  Barrett & Shyu 2001, p. 6. 
    ^  "China's Declaration of War Against Japan, Also Against Germany and Italy". Contemporary China. 1 (15). 15 December 1941.  
    ^  Axelrod, Alan (2007), Encyclopedia of World War II, 1, Infobase Publishing, p. 659, ISBN 978-0-8160-6022-1  
    ^ a b  The UN Security Council, archived from the original on 20 June 2012, retrieved 15 May  2012   
    ^  Herman Van Rompuy, President of the European Council; José Manuel Durão Barroso, President of the European Commission (10 December 2012). "From War to Peace: A European Tale". Nobel Lecture by the European Union. Archived from the original on 4 January 2014. Retrieved 4 January  2014 .  
    ^  Weinberg 2005, p. 6. 
    ^  Wells, Anne Sharp (2014) Historical Dictionary of World War II: The War against Germany and Italy. Rowman & Littlefield Publishing. p. 7. 
    ^  Ferris, John; Mawdsley, Evan (2015). The Cambridge History of the Second World War, Volume I: Fighting the War. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  
    ^  Förster & Gessler 2005, p. 64. 
    ^  Ghuhl, Wernar (2007) Imperial Japan's World War Two Transaction Publishers pp. 7, 30 
    ^  Polmar, Norman; Thomas B. Allen (1991) World War II: America at war, 1941–1945 ISBN 978-0-394-58530-7 
    ^  Ben-Horin 1943, p. 169; Taylor 1979, p. 124; Yisreelit, Hevrah Mizrahit (1965). Asian and African Studies, p. 191.
    For 1941 see Taylor 1961, p. vii; Kellogg, William O (2003). American History the Easy Way. Barron's Educational Series. p. 236 ISBN 0-7641-1973-7.
    There is also the viewpoint that both World War I and World War II are part of the same "European Civil War" or "Second Thirty Years War": Canfora 2006, p. 155; Prins 2002, p. 11. 
    ^  Beevor 2012, p. 10. 
    ^  Masaya 1990, p. 4. 
    ^  "History of German-American Relations » 1989–1994 – Reunification » "Two-plus-Four-Treaty": Treaty on the Final Settlement with Respect to Germany, September 12, 1990". usa.usembassy.de. Archived from the original on 7 May 2012. Retrieved 6 May  2012 .  
    ^  Why Japan and Russia never signed a WWII peace treaty Archived 4 June 2018 at the Wayback Machine. Asia Times. 
    ^  Ingram 2006, pp. 76–78. 
    ^  Kantowicz 1999, p. 149. 
    ^  Shaw 2000, p. 35. 
    ^  Brody 1999, p. 4. 
    ^  Zalampas 1989, p. 62. 
    ^  Mandelbaum 1988, p. 96; Record 2005, p. 50. 
    ^  Schmitz 2000, p. 124. 
    ^  Adamthwaite 1992, p. 52. 
    ^  Shirer 1990, pp. 298–99. 
    ^  Preston 1998, p. 104. 
    ^  Myers & Peattie 1987, p. 458. 
    ^  Smith & Steadman 2004, p. 28. 
    ^  Coogan 1993: "Although some Chinese troops in the Northeast managed to retreat south, others were trapped by the advancing Japanese Army and were faced with the choice of resistance in defiance of orders, or surrender. A few commanders submitted, receiving high office in the puppet government, but others took up arms against the invader. The forces they commanded were the first of the volunteer armies." 
    ^  Busky 2002, p. 10. 
    ^  Andrea L. Stanton; Edward Ramsamy; Peter J. Seybolt (2012). Cultural Sociology of the Middle East, Asia, and Africa: An Encyclopedia. p. 308. ISBN 978-1-4129-8176-7. Archived from the original on 18 August 2018. Retrieved 6 April  2014 .  
    ^  Barker 1971, pp. 131–32. 
    ^  Shirer 1990, p. 289. 
    ^  Kitson 2001, p. 231. 
    ^  Neulen 2000, p. 25. 
    ^  Payne 2008, p. 271. 
    ^  Payne 2008, p. 146. 
    ^  Eastman 1986, pp. 547–51. 
    ^  Hsu & Chang 1971, pp. 195–200. 
    ^  Tucker, Spencer C. (2009). A Global Chronology of Conflict: From the Ancient World to the Modern Middle East [6 volumes]: From the Ancient World to the Modern Middle East. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-85109-672-5. Archived from the original on 18 August 2018. Retrieved 27 August  2017  – via Google Books.  
    ^  Yang Kuisong, "On the reconstruction of the facts of the Battle of Pingxingguan" 
    ^  Levene, Mark and Roberts, Penny. The Massacre in History. 1999, pp. 223–24 
    ^  Totten, Samuel. Dictionary of Genocide. 2008, 298–99. 
    ^  Hsu & Chang 1971, pp. 221–30. 
    ^  Eastman 1986, p. 566. 
    ^  Taylor 2009, pp. 150–52. 
    ^  Sella 1983, pp. 651–87. 
    ^  Beevor 2012, p. 342. 
    ^  Goldman, Stuart D. (28 August 2012). "The Forgotten Soviet-Japanese War of 1939". The Diplomat. Archived from the original on 29 June 2015. Retrieved 26 June  2015 .  
    ^  Timothy Neeno. "Nomonhan: The Second Russo-Japanese War". MilitaryHistoryOnline.com. Archived from the original on 24 November 2005. Retrieved 26 June  2015 .  
    ^  Collier & Pedley 2000, p. 144. 
    ^  Kershaw 2001, pp. 121–22. 
    ^  Kershaw 2001, p. 157. 
    ^  Davies 2006, pp. 143–44 (2008 ed.). 
    ^  Shirer 1990, pp. 461–62. 
    ^  Lowe & Marzari 2002, p. 330. 
    ^  Dear & Foot 2001, p. 234. 
    ^  Shirer 1990, p. 471. 
    ^  Watson, Derek (2000). "Molotov's Apprenticeship in Foreign Policy: The Triple Alliance Negotiations in 1939". Europe-Asia Studies. 52 (4): 695–722. doi:10.1080/713663077. JSTOR 153322.  
    ^  Shore 2003, p. 108. 
    ^  Dear & Foot 2001, p. 608. 
    ^  "The German Campaign In Poland (1939)". Archived from the original on 24 May 2014. Retrieved 29 October  2014 .  
    ^ a b  "The Danzig Crisis". ww2db.com. Archived from the original on 5 May 2016. Retrieved 29 April  2016 .  
    ^ a b  "Major international events of 1939, with explanation". Ibiblio.org. Archived from the original on 10 March 2013. Retrieved 9 May  2013 .  
    ^  Evans 2008, pp. 1–2. 
    ^  David T. Zabecki (1 May 2015). World War II in Europe: An Encyclopedia. Routledge. p. 1663. ISBN 978-1-135-81242-3. The earliest fighting started at 0445 hours when marines from the battleship Schleswig-Holstein attempted to storm a small Polish fort in Danzig, the Westerplate  
    ^  Keegan 1997, p. 35.
    Cienciala 2010, p. 128, observes that, while it is true that Poland was far away, making it difficult for the French and British to provide support, "[f]ew Western historians of World War II ... know that the British had committed to bomb Germany if it attacked Poland, but did not do so except for one raid on the base of Wilhelmshafen. The French, who committed to attack Germany in the west, had no intention of doing so." 
    ^  Beevor 2012, p. 32; Dear & Foot 2001, pp. 248–49; Roskill 1954, p. 64. 
    ^  James Bjorkman, New Hope for Allied Shipping Archived 18 December 2018 at the Wayback Machine, Retrieved 17 December 2018. 
    ^  Zaloga 2002, pp. 80, 83. 
    ^  Ginsburgs, George (1958). "A Case Study in the Soviet Use of International Law: Eastern Poland in 1939". The American Journal of International Law. 52 (1): 69–84. doi:10.2307/2195670. JSTOR 2195670.  
    ^  Hempel 2005, p. 24. 
    ^  Zaloga 2002, pp. 88–89. 
    ^  Nuremberg Documents C-62/GB86, a directive from Hitler in October 1939 which concludes: "The attack [on France] is to be launched this Autumn if conditions are at all possible." 
    ^  Liddell Hart 1977, pp. 39–40. 
    ^  Bullock 1990, pp. 563–64, 566, 568–69, 574–75 (1983 ed.). 
    ^  Blitzkrieg: From the Rise of Hitler to the Fall of Dunkirk, L Deighton, Jonathan Cape, 1993, pp. 186–87. Deighton states that "the offensive was postponed twenty-nine times before it finally took place." 
    ^  Smith et al. 2002, p. 24. 
    ^ a b  Bilinsky 1999, p. 9. 
    ^  Murray & Millett 2001, pp. 55–56. 
    ^  Spring 1986, pp. 207–26. 
    ^  Carl van Dyke. The Soviet Invasion of Finland. Frank Cass Publishers, Portland, OR. ISBN 0-7146-4753-5, p. 71. 
    ^  Hanhimäki 1997, p. 12. 
    ^  Ferguson 2006, pp. 367, 376, 379, 417. 
    ^  Snyder 2010, p. 118ff. 
    ^  Koch 1983, pp. 912–14, 917–20. 
    ^  Roberts 2006, p. 56. 
    ^  Roberts 2006, p. 59. 
    ^  Murray & Millett 2001, pp. 57–63. 
    ^  Commager 2004, p. 9. 
    ^  Reynolds 2006, p. 76. 
    ^  Evans 2008, pp. 122–23. 
    ^  Keegan 1997, pp. 59–60. 
    ^  Regan 2004, p. 152. 
    ^  Liddell Hart 1977, p. 48. 
    ^  Keegan 1997, pp. 66–67. 
    ^  Overy & Wheatcroft 1999, p. 207. 
    ^  Umbreit 1991, p. 311. 
    ^  Brown 2004, p. 198. 
    ^  Keegan 1997, p. 72. 
    ^ a b  Murray 1983, The Battle of Britain. 
    ^ a b c  "Major international events of 1940, with explanation". Ibiblio.org. Archived from the original on 25 May 2013.  
    ^  Dear & Foot 2001, pp. 108–09. 
    ^  Goldstein 2004, p. 35 
    ^  Steury 1987, p. 209; Zetterling & Tamelander 2009, p. 282. 
    ^  Overy & Wheatcroft 1999, pp. 328–30. 
    ^  Maingot 1994, p. 52. 
    ^  Cantril 1940, p. 390. 
    ^  Skinner Watson, Mark. "Coordination With Britain". US Army in WWII – Chief of Staff: Prewar Plans and Operations. Archived from the original on 30 April 2013. Retrieved 13 May  2013 .  
    ^  Bilhartz & Elliott 2007, p. 179. 
    ^  Dear & Foot 2001, p. 877. 
    ^  Dear & Foot 2001, pp. 745–46. 
    ^  Clogg 2002, p. 118. 
    ^  Evans 2008, pp. 146, 152; US Army 1986, pp. 4–6 
    ^  Jowett 2001, pp. 9–10. 
    ^  Jackson 2006, p. 106. 
    ^  Laurier 2001, pp. 7–8. 
    ^  Murray & Millett 2001, pp. 263–76. 
    ^  Gilbert 1989, pp. 174–75. 
    ^  Gilbert 1989, pp. 184–87. 
    ^  Gilbert 1989, pp. 208, 575, 604. 
    ^  Watson 2003, p. 80. 
    ^  Garver 1988, p. 114. 
    ^  Weinberg 2005, p. 195. 
    ^  Murray 1983, p. 69. 
    ^  Shirer 1990, pp. 810–12. 
    ^ a b  Klooz, Marle; Wiley, Evelyn (1944), Events leading up to World War II – Chronological History, 78th Congress, 2d Session – House Document N. 541, Director: Humphrey, Richard A., Washington: US Government Printing Office, pp. 267–312 (1941), archived from the original on 14 December 2013, retrieved 9 May  2013  . 
    ^  Sella 1978. 
    ^  Kershaw 2007, pp. 66–69. 
    ^  Steinberg 1995. 
    ^  Hauner 1978. 
    ^  Roberts 1995. 
    ^  Wilt 1981. 
    ^  Erickson 2003, pp. 114–37. 
    ^  Glantz 2001, p. 9. 
    ^  Farrell 1993. 
    ^  Keeble 1990, p. 29. 
    ^  Bueno de Mesquita et al. 2003, p. 425. 
    ^  Beevor 2012, p. 220. 
    ^  Kleinfeld 1983. 
    ^  Jukes 2001, p. 113. 
    ^  Glantz 2001, p. 26: "By 1 November [the Wehrmacht] had lost fully 20% of its committed strength (686,000 men), up to 2/3 of its ½-million motor vehicles, and 65 percent of its tanks. The German Army High Command (OKH) rated its 136 divisions as equivalent to 83 full-strength divisions." 
    ^  Reinhardt 1992, p. 227. 
    ^  Milward 1964. 
    ^  Rotundo 1986. 
    ^  Glantz 2001, p. 26. 
    ^  Deighton, Len (1993). Blood, Tears and Folly. London: Pimlico. p. 479. ISBN 978-0-7126-6226-0.  
    ^  Beevor 1998, pp. 41–42; Evans 2008, pp. 213–14, notes that "Zhukov had pushed the Germans back where they had launched Operation Typhoon two months before. ... Only Stalin's decision to attack all along the front instead of concentrating his forces in an all-out assault against the retreating German Army Group Centre prevented the disaster from being even worse." 
    ^  Jowett & Andrew 2002, p. 14. 
    ^  Overy & Wheatcroft 1999, p. 289. 
    ^  Morison 2002, p. 60. 
    ^  Joes 2004, p. 224. 
    ^  Fairbank & Goldman 2006, p. 320. 
    ^  Hsu & Chang 1971, p. 30. 
    ^  Hsu & Chang 1971, p. 33. 
    ^  "Japanese Policy and Strategy 1931 – July 1941". US Army in WWII – Strategy and Command: The First Two Years. pp. 45–66. Archived from the original on 6 January 2013. Retrieved 15 May  2013 .  
    ^  Anderson 1975, p. 201. 
    ^  Evans & Peattie 2012, p. 456. 
    ^  Coox, Alvin (1985). Nomonhan: Japan against Russia, 1939. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. pp. 1046–49. ISBN 978-0-8047-1835-6.  
    ^ a b  "The decision for War". US Army in WWII – Strategy and Command: The First Two Years. pp. 113–27. Archived from the original on 25 May 2013. Retrieved 15 May  2013 .  
    ^ a b  "The Showdown With Japan Aug–Dec 1941". US Army in WWII – Strategic Planning for Coalition Warfare. pp. 63–96. Archived from the original on 9 November 2012. Retrieved 15 May  2013 .  
    ^  The United States Replies Archived 29 April 2013 at the Wayback Machine. Investigation of the Pearl Harbor attack. 
    ^  Painter 2012, p. 26: "The United States cut off oil exports to Japan in the summer of 1941, forcing Japanese leaders to choose between going to war to seize the oil fields of the Netherlands East Indies or giving in to U.S. pressure." 
    ^  Wood 2007, p. 9, listing various military and diplomatic developments, observes that "the threat to Japan was not purely economic." 
    ^  Lightbody 2004, p. 125. 
    ^  Weinberg 2005, p. 310 
    ^  Dower 1986, p. 5, calls attention to the fact that "the Allied struggle against Japan exposed the racist underpinnings of the European and American colonial structure. Japan did not invade independent countries in southern Asia. It invaded colonial outposts which the Westerners had dominated for generations, taking absolutely for granted their racial and cultural superiority over their Asian subjects." Dower goes on to note that, before the horrors of Japanese occupation made themselves felt, many Asians responded favourably to the victories of the Imperial Japanese forces. 
    ^  Wood 2007, pp. 11–12. 
    ^ a b  Wohlstetter 1962, pp. 341–43. 
    ^  Dunn 1998, p. 157. According to May 1955, p. 155, Churchill stated: "Russian declaration of war on Japan would be greatly to our advantage, provided, but only provided, that Russians are confident that will not impair their Western Front." 
    ^  Adolf Hitler's Declaration of War against the United States in Wikisource. 
    ^  Klooz, Marle; Wiley, Evelyn (1944), Events leading up to World War II – Chronological History, 78th Congress, 2d Session – House Document N. 541, Director: Humphrey, Richard A., Washington: US Government Printing Office, p. 310 (1941), archived from the original on 14 December 2013, retrieved 9 May  2013  . 
    ^  Bosworth & Maiolo 2015, pp. 313–14. 
    ^  Mingst & Karns 2007, p. 22. 
    ^  Shirer 1990, p. 904. 
    ^  "The First Full Dress Debate over Strategic Deployment. Dec 1941 – Jan 1942". US Army in WWII – Strategic Planning for Coalition Warfare. pp. 97–119. Archived from the original on 9 November 2012. Retrieved 16 May  2013 .  
    ^  "The Elimination of the Alternatives. Jul–Aug 1942". US Army in WWII – Strategic Planning for Coalition Warfare. pp. 266–92. Archived from the original on 30 April 2013. Retrieved 16 May  2013 .  
    ^  "Casablanca – Beginning of an Era: January 1943". US Army in WWII – Strategic Planning for Coalition Warfare. pp. 18–42. Archived from the original on 25 May 2013. Retrieved 16 May  2013 .  
    ^  "The Trident Conference – New Patterns: May 1943". US Army in WWII – Strategic Planning for Coalition Warfare. pp. 126–45. Archived from the original on 25 May 2013. Retrieved 16 May  2013 .  
    ^  Beevor 2012, pp. 247–67, 345. 
    ^  Lewis 1953, p. 529 (Table 11). 
    ^  Slim 1956, pp. 71–74. 
    ^  Grove 1995, p. 362. 
    ^  Ch'i 1992, p. 158. 
    ^  Perez 1998, p. 145. 
    ^  Maddox 1992, pp. 111–12. 
    ^  Salecker 2001, p. 186. 
    ^  Schoppa 2011, p. 28. 
    ^  Chevrier & Chomiczewski & Garrigue 2004 Archived 18 August 2018 at the Wayback Machine, p. 19. 
    ^  Ropp 2000, p. 368. 
    ^  Weinberg 2005, p. 339. 
    ^  Gilbert, Adrian (2003). The Encyclopedia of Warfare: From Earliest Times to the Present Day. Globe Pequot. p. 259. ISBN 978-1-59228-027-8.  
    ^  Swain 2001, p. 197. 
    ^  Hane 2001, p. 340. 
    ^  Marston 2005, p. 111. 
    ^  Brayley 2002, p. 9. 
    ^  Glantz 2001, p. 31. 
    ^  Read 2004, p. 764. 
    ^  Davies 2006, p. 100 (2008 ed.). 
    ^  Beevor 1998, pp. 239–65. 
    ^  Black 2003, p. 119. 
    ^  Beevor 1998, pp. 383–91. 
    ^  Erickson 2001, p. 142. 
    ^  Milner 1990, p. 52. 
    ^  Beevor 2012, pp. 224–28. 
    ^  Molinari 2007, p. 91. 
    ^  Mitcham 2007, p. 31. 
    ^  Beevor 2012, pp. 380–81. 
    ^  Rich 1992, p. 178. 
    ^  Gordon 2004, p. 129. 
    ^  Neillands 2005. 
    ^  Keegan 1997, p. 277. 
    ^  Smith 2002. 
    ^  Thomas & Andrew 1998, p. 8. 
    ^ a b c d  Ross 1997, p. 38. 
    ^  Bonner & Bonner 2001, p. 24. 
    ^  Collier 2003, p. 11. 
    ^  "The Civilians" Archived 5 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine United States Strategic Bombing Survey Summary Report (European War) 
    ^  Overy 1995, pp. 119–20. 
    ^  Thompson & Randall 2008, p. 164. 
    ^  Kennedy 2001, p. 610. 
    ^  Rottman 2002, p. 228. 
    ^  Glantz 1986; Glantz 1989, pp. 149–59. 
    ^  Kershaw 2001, p. 592. 
    ^  O'Reilly 2001, p. 32. 
    ^  Bellamy 2007, p. 595. 
    ^  O'Reilly 2001, p. 35. 
    ^  Healy 1992, p. 90. 
    ^  Glantz 2001, pp. 50–55. 
    ^  Kolko 1990, p. 45 
    ^  Mazower 2008, p. 362. 
    ^  Hart, Hart & Hughes 2000, p. 151. 
    ^  Blinkhorn 2006, p. 52. 
    ^  Read & Fisher 2002, p. 129. 
    ^  Padfield 1998, pp. 335–36. 
    ^  Kolko 1990, pp. 211, 235, 267–68. 
    ^  Iriye 1981, p. 154. 
    ^  Mitter 2014, p. 286. 
    ^  Polley 2000, p. 148. 
    ^  Beevor 2012, pp. 268–74. 
    ^  Ch'i 1992, p. 161. 
    ^  Hsu & Chang 1971, pp. 412–16, Map 38 
    ^  Weinberg 2005, pp. 660–61. 
    ^  Glantz 2002, pp. 327–66. 
    ^  Glantz 2002, pp. 367–414. 
    ^  Chubarov 2001, p. 122. 
    ^  Holland 2008, pp. 169–84; Beevor 2012, pp. 568–73.
    The weeks after the fall of Rome saw a dramatic upswing in German atrocities in Italy (Mazower 2008, pp. 500–02). The period featured massacres with victims in the hundreds at Civitella (de Grazia & Paggi 1991; Belco 2010), Fosse Ardeatine (Portelli 2003), and Sant'Anna di Stazzema (Gordon 2012, pp. 10–11), and is capped with the Marzabotto massacre. 
    ^  Lightbody 2004, p. 224. 
    ^ a b  Zeiler 2004, p. 60. 
    ^  Beevor 2012, pp. 555–60. 
    ^  Ch'i 1992, p. 163. 
    ^  Coble 2003, p. 85. 
    ^  Rees 2008, pp. 406–07: "Stalin always believed that Britain and America were delaying the second front so that the Soviet Union would bear the brunt of the war." 
    ^  Weinberg 2005, p. 695. 
    ^  Badsey 1990, p. 91. 
    ^  Dear & Foot 2001, p. 562. 
    ^  Forrest, Evans & Gibbons 2012, p. 191 
    ^  Zaloga 1996, p. 7: "It was the most calamitous defeat of all the German armed forces in World War II." 
    ^  Berend 1996, p. 8. 
    ^  "Armistice Negotiations and Soviet Occupation". US Library of Congress. Archived from the original on 30 April 2011. Retrieved 14 November  2009 . The coup speeded the Red Army's advance, and the Soviet Union later awarded Michael the Order of Victory for his personal courage in overthrowing Antonescu and putting an end to Romania's war against the Allies. Western historians uniformly point out that the Communists played only a supporting role in the coup; postwar Romanian historians, however, ascribe to the Communists the decisive role in Antonescu's overthrow  
    ^  Evans 2008, p. 653. 
    ^  Wiest & Barbier 2002, pp. 65–66. 
    ^  Wiktor, Christian L (1998). Multilateral Treaty Calendar – 1648–1995. Kluwer Law International. p. 426. ISBN 978-90-411-0584-4.  
    ^  Schire 1990, p. 1085. 
    ^  Marston 2005, p. 120. 
    ^  Article about War of Resistance "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 16 March  2013 . CS1 maint: Archived copy as title (link)  
    ^  Jowett & Andrew 2002, p. 8. 
    ^  Howard 2004, p. 140. 
    ^  Drea 2003, p. 54. 
    ^  Cook & Bewes 1997, p. 305. 
    ^ a b  Parker 2004, pp. xiii–xiv, 6–8, 68–70, 329–30 
    ^  Glantz 2001, p. 85. 
    ^  Beevor 2012, pp. 709–22. 
    ^  Buchanan 2006, p. 21. 
    ^  Shepardson 1998. 
    ^  O'Reilly 2001, p. 244. 
    ^  Kershaw 2001, p. 823. 
    ^  Evans 2008, p. 737. 
    ^  Glantz 1998, p. 24. 
    ^  Chant, Christopher (1986). The Encyclopedia of Codenames of World War II. Routledge & Kegan Paul. p. 118. ISBN 978-0-7102-0718-0.  
    ^  Long, Tony (9 March 2011). "March 9, 1945: Burning the Heart Out of the Enemy". Wired. Wired Magazine. Archived from the original on 23 March 2017. Retrieved 22 June  2018 . 1945: In the single deadliest air raid of World War II, 330 American B-29s rain incendiary bombs on Tokyo, touching off a firestorm that kills upwards of 100,000 people, burns a quarter of the city to the ground, and leaves a million homeless.  
    ^  Drea 2003, p. 57. 
    ^  Jowett & Andrew 2002, p. 6. 
    ^  Poirier, Michel Thomas (20 October 1999). "Results of the German and American Submarine Campaigns of World War II". U.S. Navy. Archived from the original on 9 April 2008. Retrieved 13 April  2008 .  
    ^  Williams 2006, p. 90. 
    ^  Miscamble 2007, p. 201. 
    ^  Miscamble 2007, pp. 203–04. 
    ^  Ward Wilson. "The Winning Weapon? Rethinking Nuclear Weapons in Light of Hiroshima". International Security, Vol. 31, No. 4 (Spring 2007), pp. 162–79. 
    ^  Glantz 2005. 
    ^  Pape 1993 " The principal cause of Japan's surrender was the ability of the United States to increase the military vulnerability of Japan's home islands, persuading Japanese leaders that defense of the homeland was highly unlikely to succeed. The key military factor causing this effect was the sea blockade, which crippled Japan's ability to produce and equip the forces necessary to execute its strategy. The most important factor accounting for the timing of surrender was the Soviet attack against Manchuria, largely because it persuaded previously adamant Army leaders that the homeland could not be defended.". 
    ^  Beevor 2012, p. 776. 
    ^  Frei 2002, pp. 41–66. 
    ^  Eberhardt, Piotr (2015). "The Oder-Neisse Line as Poland's western border: As postulated and made a reality". Geographia Polonica. 88 (1): 77–105. doi:10.7163/GPol.0007. Archived from the original on 3 May 2018. Retrieved 3 May  2018 .  
    ^  Eberhardt, Piotr (2006). Political Migrations in Poland 1939–1948 (PDF) . Warsaw: Didactica. ISBN 978-1-5361-1035-7. Archived from the original (PDF)  on 26 June 2015.  
    ^ a b  Eberhardt, Piotr (2011). Political Migrations On Polish Territories (1939-1950) (PDF) . Warsaw: Polish Academy of Sciences. ISBN 978-83-61590-46-0. Archived (PDF)  from the original on 20 May 2014. Retrieved 3 May  2018 .  
    ^  Eberhardt, Piotr (2012). "The Curzon line as the eastern boundary of Poland. The origins and the political background". Geographia Polonica. 85 (1): 5–21. doi:10.7163/GPol.2012.1.1. Archived from the original on 3 May 2018. Retrieved 3 May  2018 .  
    ^  Roberts 2006, p. 43. 
    ^  Roberts 2006, p. 55. 
    ^  Shirer 1990, p. 794. 
    ^  Kennedy-Pipe 1995. 
    ^  Wettig 2008, pp. 20–21. 
    ^  Senn 2007, p. ?. 
    ^  Yoder 1997, p. 39. 
    ^  "History of the UN". United Nations. Archived from the original on 18 February 2010. Retrieved 25 January  2010 .  
    ^  Waltz 2002.
    The UDHR is viewable here [1] Archived 3 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine. 
    ^  Kantowicz 2000, p. 6. 
    ^  Wettig 2008, pp. 96–100. 
    ^  Trachtenberg 1999, p. 33. 
    ^  Applebaum 2012. 
    ^  Naimark 2010. 
    ^  Swain 1992. 
    ^  Borstelmann 2005, p. 318. 
    ^  Leffler & Westad 2010. 
    ^  Weinberg 2005, p. 911. 
    ^  Stueck 2010, p. 71. 
    ^  Lynch 2010, pp. 12–13. 
    ^  Roberts 1997, p. 589. 
    ^  Darwin 2007, pp. 441–43, 464–68. 
    ^  Dear & Foot 2001, p. 1006; Harrison 1998, pp. 34–55. 
    ^  Balabkins 1964, p. 207. 
    ^  Petrov 1967, p. 263. 
    ^  Balabkins 1964, pp. 208, 209. 
    ^  DeLong & Eichengreen 1993, pp. 190, 191 
    ^  Balabkins 1964, p. 212. 
    ^  Wolf 1993, pp. 29, 30, 32 
    ^  Bull & Newell 2005, pp. 20, 21 
    ^  Ritchie 1992, p. 23. 
    ^  Minford 1993, p. 117. 
    ^  Schain 2001. 
    ^  Emadi-Coffin 2002, p. 64. 
    ^  Smith 1993, p. 32. 
    ^  Neary 1992, p. 49. 
    ^  Genzberger, Christine (1994). China Business: The Portable Encyclopedia for Doing Business with China. Petaluma, CA: World Trade Press. p. 4. ISBN 978-0-9631864-3-0.  
    ^  O'Brien, Prof. Joseph V. "World War II: Combatants and Casualties (1937–1945)". Obee's History Page. John Jay College of Criminal Justice. Archived from the original on 25 December 2010. Retrieved 28 December  2013 .  
    ^  White, Matthew. "Source List and Detailed Death Tolls for the Twentieth Century Hemoclysm". Historical Atlas of the Twentieth Century. Matthew White's Homepage. Archived from the original on 7 March 2011. Retrieved 20 April  2007 .  
    ^  "World War II Fatalities". secondworldwar.co.uk. Archived from the original on 22 September 2008. Retrieved 20 April  2007 .  
    ^  Hosking 2006, p. 242 
    ^  Ellman & Maksudov 1994. 
    ^  Smith 1994, p. 204. 
    ^  Herf 2003. 
    ^  Friedrich, Karsten. The Cruel Slaughter of Adolf Hitler. Lulu.com. ISBN 978-1-4467-9570-5. Archived from the original on 18 August 2018. Retrieved 27 August  2017  – via Google Books.  
    ^  Florida Center for Instructional Technology (2005). "Victims". A Teacher's Guide to the Holocaust. University of South Florida. Archived from the original on 16 May 2016. Retrieved 2 February  2008 .  
    ^ a b  Niewyk & Nicosia 2000, pp. 45–52. 
    ^  Snyder, Timothy (16 July 2009). "Holocaust: The Ignored Reality". The New York Review of Books. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 27 August  2017 .  
    ^  "Polish Victims". www.ushmm.org. Archived from the original on 7 May 2016. Retrieved 27 August  2017 .  
    ^  "Non-Jewish Holocaust Victims : The 5,000,000 others". BBC. April 2006. Archived from the original on 3 March 2013. Retrieved 4 August  2013 .  
    ^  Evans 2008, pp. 158–60, 234–36. 
    ^  Massacre, Volhynia. "The Effects of the Volhynian Massacres". Volhynia Massacre. Archived from the original on 21 June 2018. Retrieved 9 July  2018 .  
    ^  "Od rzezi wołyńskiej do akcji Wisła. Konflikt polsko-ukraiński 1943–1947". dzieje.pl (in Polish). Archived from the original on 24 June 2018. Retrieved 10 March  2018 .  
    ^  Dear & Foot 2001, p. 290. 
    ^  Rummell, R.J. "Statistics". Freedom, Democide, War. The University of Hawaii System. Archived from the original on 23 March 2010. Retrieved 25 January  2010 .  
    ^  Chang 1997, p. 102. 
    ^  Bix 2000, p. ?. 
    ^  Gold, Hal (1996). Unit 731 testimony. Tuttle. pp. 75–77. ISBN 978-0-8048-3565-7.  
    ^  Tucker & Roberts 2004, p. 320. 
    ^  Harris 2002, p. 74. 
    ^  Lee 2002, p. 69. 
    ^  "Japan tested chemical weapons on Aussie POW: new evidence". The Japan Times Online. 27 July 2004. Archived from the original on 29 May 2012. Retrieved 25 January  2010 .  
    ^  Kużniar-Plota, Małgorzata (30 November 2004). "Decision to commence investigation into Katyn Massacre". Departmental Commission for the Prosecution of Crimes against the Polish Nation. Retrieved 4 August 2011. 
    ^  Robert Gellately (2007). Lenin, Stalin, and Hitler: The Age of Social Catastrophe. Knopf, ISBN 1-4000-4005-1 p. 391 
    ^  Terror from the Sky: The Bombing of German Cities in World War II. Berghahn Books. 2010. p. 167. ISBN 978-1-84545-844-7.  
    ^  John Dower (2007). "Lessons from Iwo Jima". Perspectives. 45 (6): 54–56. Archived from the original on 17 January 2011. Retrieved 12 January  2014 .  
    ^  Institute of National Remembrance, Polska 1939–1945 Straty osobowe i ofiary represji pod dwiema okupacjami. Materski and Szarota. page 9 "Total Polish population losses under German occupation are currently calculated at about 2 770 000". 
    ^  (2006). The World Must Know: The History of the Holocaust as Told in the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. ISBN 978-0-8018-8358-3. 
    ^  Herbert 1994, p. 222 
    ^  Overy 2004, pp. 568–69. 
    ^ a b  Marek, Michael (27 October 2005). "Final Compensation Pending for Former Nazi Forced Laborers". dw-world.de. Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 2 May 2006. Retrieved 19 January  2010 .  
    ^  J. Arch Getty, Gábor T. Rittersporn and Viktor N. Zemskov. Victims of the Soviet Penal System in the Pre-War Years: A First Approach on the Basisof Archival Evidence. The American Historical Review, Vol. 98, No. 4 (Oct., 1993), pp. 1017–49 
    ^  Applebaum 2003, pp. 389–96. 
    ^  Zemskov V.N. On repatriation of Soviet citizens. Istoriya SSSR., 1990, No.4, (in Russian). See also [2] Archived 14 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine (online version), and Bacon 1992; Ellman 2002. 
    ^  "Japanese Atrocities in the Philippines". American Experience: the Bataan Rescue. PBS Online. Archived from the original on 27 July 2003. Retrieved 18 January  2010 .  
    ^  Tanaka 1996, pp. 2–3. 
    ^  Bix 2000, p. 360. 
    ^ a b  Ju, Zhifen (June 2002). "Japan's atrocities of conscripting and abusing north China draughtees after the outbreak of the Pacific war". Joint Study of the Sino-Japanese War: Minutes of the June 2002 Conference. Harvard University Faculty of Arts and Sciences. Archived from the original on 21 May 2012. Retrieved 28 December  2013 .  
    ^ a b  "Indonesia: World War II and the Struggle For Independence, 1942–50; The Japanese Occupation, 1942–45". Library of Congress. 1992. Archived from the original on 30 October 2004. Retrieved 9 February  2007 .  
    ^  Liberman 1996, p. 42. 
    ^  Milward 1992, p. 138. 
    ^  Milward 1992, p. 148. 
    ^  Barber & Harrison 2006, p. 232. 
    ^  Hill 2005, p. 5. 
    ^  Christofferson & Christofferson 2006, p. 156 
    ^  Radtke 1997, p. 107. 
    ^ a b  Rahn 2001, p. 266. 
    ^ a b  Harrison 1998, p. 3. 
    ^  Mark R. Wilson, Destructive Creation: American Business and the Winning of World War II (2016) p.2. 
    ^  Harrison 1998, p. 2. 
    ^  Bernstein 1991, p. 267. 
    ^  Griffith, Charles (1999). The Quest: Haywood Hansell and American Strategic Bombing in World War II. Diane Publishing. p. 203. ISBN 978-1-58566-069-8.  
    ^  Overy 1994, p. 26. 
    ^  BBSU 1998, p. 84; Lindberg & Todd 2001, p. 126.. 
    ^  Unidas, Naciones (2005). World Economic And Social Survey 2004: International Migration. United Nations Pubns. p. 23. ISBN 978-92-1-109147-2.  
    ^  Tucker & Roberts 2004, p. 76. 
    ^  Levine 1992, p. 227. 
    ^  Klavans, Di Benedetto & Prudom 1997; Ward 2010, pp. 247–51. 
    ^  Tucker & Roberts 2004, p. 163. 
    ^  Bishop, Chris; Chant, Chris (2004). Aircraft Carriers: The World's Greatest Naval Vessels and Their Aircraft. Wigston, Leics: Silverdale Books. p. 7. ISBN 978-1-84509-079-1.  
    ^  Chenoweth, H. Avery; Nihart, Brooke (2005). Semper Fi: The Definitive Illustrated History of the U.S. Marines. New York: Main Street. p. 180. ISBN 978-1-4027-3099-3.  
    ^  Sumner & Baker 2001, p. 25. 
    ^  Hearn 2007, p. 14. 
    ^  Gardiner & Brown 2004, p. 52. 
    ^  Burcher & Rydill 1995, p. 15. 
    ^  Burcher & Rydill 1995, p. 16. 
    ^ a b  Tucker & Roberts 2004, p. 125. 
    ^  Dupuy, Trevor Nevitt (1982). The Evolution of Weapons and Warfare. Jane's Information Group. p. 231. ISBN 978-0-7106-0123-0.  
    ^ a b  Tucker & Roberts 2004, p. 108. 
    ^  Tucker & Roberts 2004, p. 734. 
    ^ a b  Cowley & Parker 2001, p. 221. 
    ^  Sprague, Oliver; Griffiths, Hugh (2006). "The AK-47: the worlds favourite killing machine" (PDF) . controlarms.org. p. 1. Archived from the original on 28 December 2018. Retrieved 14 November  2009 .  
    ^  Ratcliff 2006, p. 11. 
    ^ a b  Schoenherr, Steven (2007). "Code Breaking in World War II". History Department at the University of San Diego. Archived from the original on 9 May 2008. Retrieved 15 November  2009 .  
    ^  Macintyre, Ben (10 December 2010). "Bravery of thousands of Poles was vital in securing victory". The Times. London. p. 27.  
    ^  Rowe, Neil C.; Rothstein, Hy. "Deception for Defense of Information Systems: Analogies from Conventional Warfare". Departments of Computer Science and Defense Analysis U.S. Naval Postgraduate School. Air University. Archived from the original on 23 November 2010. Retrieved 15 November  2009 .  
    ^  "Discovery and Development of Penicillin: International Historic Chemical Landmark". Washington, D.C.: American Chemical Society. Archived from the original on 28 June 2019. Retrieved 15 July  2019 .  

References 
Main article: Bibliography of World War II

    Adamthwaite, Anthony P. (1992). The Making of the Second World War. New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-90716-3. 
    Anderson, Irvine H., Jr. (1975). "The 1941 De Facto Embargo on Oil to Japan: A Bureaucratic Reflex". The Pacific Historical Review. 44 (2): 201–31. doi:10.2307/3638003. JSTOR 3638003. 
    Applebaum, Anne (2003). Gulag: A History of the Soviet Camps. London: Allen Lane. ISBN 978-0-7139-9322-6. 
    ——— (2012). Iron Curtain: The Crushing of Eastern Europe 1944–56. London: Allen Lane. ISBN 978-0-7139-9868-9. 
    Bacon, Edwin (1992). "Glasnost' and the Gulag: New Information on Soviet Forced Labour around World War II". Soviet Studies. 44 (6): 1069–86. doi:10.1080/09668139208412066. JSTOR 152330. 
    Badsey, Stephen (1990). Normandy 1944: Allied Landings and Breakout. Oxford: Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-0-85045-921-0. 
    Balabkins, Nicholas (1964). Germany Under Direct Controls: Economic Aspects of Industrial Disarmament 1945–1948. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press. ISBN 978-0-8135-0449-0. 
    Barber, John; Harrison, Mark (2006). "Patriotic War, 1941–1945".  In Ronald Grigor Suny, ed.,' The Cambridge History of Russia, Volume III: The Twentieth Century pp. 217–42. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-81144-6. 
    Barker, A.J. (1971). The Rape of Ethiopia 1936. New York: Ballantine Books. ISBN 978-0-345-02462-6. 
    Barrett, David P.; Shyu, Lawrence N. (2001). China in the Anti-Japanese War, 1937–1945: Politics, Culture and Society. New York: Peter Lang. ISBN 978-0-8204-4556-4. 
    Beevor, Antony (1998). Stalingrad. New York: Viking. ISBN 978-0-670-87095-0. 
    ——— (2012). The Second World War. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson. ISBN 978-0-297-84497-6. 
    Belco, Victoria (2010). War, Massacre, and Recovery in Central Italy: 1943–1948. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. ISBN 978-0-8020-9314-1. 
    Bellamy, Chris T. (2007). Absolute War: Soviet Russia in the Second World War. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-375-41086-4. 
    Ben-Horin, Eliahu (1943). The Middle East: Crossroads of History. New York: W.W. Norton. 
    Berend, Ivan T. (1996). Central and Eastern Europe, 1944–1993: Detour from the Periphery to the Periphery. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-55066-6. 
    Bernstein, Gail Lee (1991). Recreating Japanese Women, 1600–1945. Berkeley & Los Angeles: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-07017-2. 
    Bilhartz, Terry D.; Elliott, Alan C. (2007). Currents in American History: A Brief History of the United States. Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe. ISBN 978-0-7656-1821-4. 
    Bilinsky, Yaroslav (1999). Endgame in NATO's Enlargement: The Baltic States and Ukraine. Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-275-96363-7. 
    Bix, Herbert P. (2000). Hirohito and the Making of Modern Japan. New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-019314-0. 
    Black, Jeremy (2003). World War Two: A Military History. Abingdon & New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-30534-1. 
    Blinkhorn, Martin (2006) [1984]. Mussolini and Fascist Italy (3rd ed.). Abingdon & New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-26206-4. 
    Bonner, Kit; Bonner, Carolyn (2001). Warship Boneyards. Osceola, WI: MBI Publishing Company. ISBN 978-0-7603-0870-7. 
    Borstelmann, Thomas (2005). "The United States, the Cold War, and the colour line".  In Melvyn P. Leffler and David S. Painter, eds., Origins of the Cold War: An International History (pp. 317–32)  (2nd ed.). Abingdon & New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-34109-7. 
    Bosworth, Richard; Maiolo, Joseph (2015). The Cambridge History of the Second World War Volume 2: Politics and Ideology. The Cambridge History of the Second World War (3 vol). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 313–14. 
    Brayley, Martin J. (2002). The British Army 1939–45, Volume 3: The Far East. Oxford: Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84176-238-8. 
    British Bombing Survey Unit (1998). The Strategic Air War Against Germany, 1939–1945. London & Portland, OR: Frank Cass Publishers. ISBN 978-0-7146-4722-7. 
    Brody, J. Kenneth (1999). The Avoidable War: Pierre Laval and the Politics of Reality, 1935–1936. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers. ISBN 978-0-7658-0622-2. 
    Brown, David (2004). The Road to Oran: Anglo-French Naval Relations, September 1939 – July 1940. London & New York: Frank Cass. ISBN 978-0-7146-5461-4. 
    Buchanan, Tom (2006). Europe's Troubled Peace, 1945–2000. Oxford & Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-0-631-22162-3. 
    Budiansky, Stephen (2001). Battle of Wits: The Complete Story of Codebreaking in World War II. London: Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-028105-7. 
    Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce; Smith, Alastair; Siverson, Randolph M.; Morrow, James D. (2003). The Logic of Political Survival. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-02546-1. 
    Bull, Martin J.; Newell, James L. (2005). Italian Politics: Adjustment Under Duress. Polity. ISBN 978-0-7456-1298-0. 
    Bullock, Alan (1990). Hitler: A Study in Tyranny. London: Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-013564-0. 
    Burcher, Roy; Rydill, Louis (1995). Concepts in Submarine Design. Journal of Applied Mechanics. 62. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 268. Bibcode:1995JAM....62R.268B. doi:10.1115/1.2895927. ISBN 978-0-521-55926-3. 
    Busky, Donald F. (2002). Communism in History and Theory: Asia, Africa, and the Americas. Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers. ISBN 978-0-275-97733-7. 
    Canfora, Luciano (2006) [2004]. Democracy in Europe: A History. Oxford & Malden MA: Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4051-1131-7. 
    Cantril, Hadley (1940). "America Faces the War: A Study in Public Opinion". Public Opinion Quarterly. 4 (3): 387–407. doi:10.1086/265420. JSTOR 2745078. 
    Chang, Iris (1997). The Rape of Nanking: The Forgotten Holocaust of World War II. New York: Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-465-06835-7. 
    Christofferson, Thomas R.; Christofferson, Michael S. (2006). France During World War II: From Defeat to Liberation. New York: Fordham University Press. ISBN 978-0-8232-2562-0. 
    Chubarov, Alexander (2001). Russia's Bitter Path to Modernity: A History of the Soviet and Post-Soviet Eras. London & New York: Continuum. ISBN 978-0-8264-1350-5. 
    Ch'i, Hsi-Sheng (1992). "The Military Dimension, 1942–1945".  In James C. Hsiung and Steven I. Levine, eds., China's Bitter Victory: War with Japan, 1937–45 pp. 157–84. Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe. ISBN 978-1-56324-246-5. 
    Cienciala, Anna M. (2010). "Another look at the Poles and Poland during World War II". The Polish Review. 55 (1): 123–43. JSTOR 25779864. 
    Clogg, Richard (2002). A Concise History of Greece (2nd ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-80872-9. 
    Coble, Parks M. (2003). Chinese Capitalists in Japan's New Order: The Occupied Lower Yangzi, 1937–1945. Berkeley & Los Angeles: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-23268-6. 
    Collier, Paul (2003). The Second World War (4): The Mediterranean 1940–1945. Oxford: Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84176-539-6. 
    Collier, Martin; Pedley, Philip (2000). Germany 1919–45. Oxford: Heinemann. ISBN 978-0-435-32721-7. 
    Commager, Henry Steele (2004). The Story of the Second World War. Brassey's. ISBN 978-1-57488-741-9. 
    Coogan, Anthony (1993). "The Volunteer Armies of Northeast China". History Today. 43. Retrieved 6 May  2012 . 
    Cook, Chris; Bewes, Diccon (1997). What Happened Where: A Guide to Places and Events in Twentieth-Century History. London: UCL Press. ISBN 978-1-85728-532-1. 
    Cowley, Robert; Parker, Geoffrey, eds. (2001). The Reader's Companion to Military History. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. ISBN 978-0-618-12742-9. 
    Darwin, John (2007). After Tamerlane: The Rise & Fall of Global Empires 1400–2000. London: Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-101022-9. 
    Davidson, Eugene (1999). The Death and Life of Germany: An Account of the American Occupation. University of Missouri Press. ISBN 978-0-8262-1249-8. 
    Davies, Norman (2006). Europe at War 1939–1945: No Simple Victory. London: Macmillan. ix+544 pages. ISBN 978-0-333-69285-1. OCLC 70401618. 
    Dear, I.C.B.; Foot, M.R.D., eds. (2001) [1995]. The Oxford Companion to World War II. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-860446-4. 
    DeLong, J. Bradford; Eichengreen, Barry (1993). "The Marshall Plan: History's Most Successful Structural Adjustment Program".  In Rudiger Dornbusch, Wilhelm Nölling and Richard Layard, eds., Postwar Economic Reconstruction and Lessons for the East Today (pp. 189–230) . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-04136-2. 
    Dower, John W. (1986). War Without Mercy: Race and Power in the Pacific War. New York: Pantheon Books. ISBN 978-0-394-50030-0. 
    Drea, Edward J. (2003). In the Service of the Emperor: Essays on the Imperial Japanese Army. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press. ISBN 978-0-8032-6638-4. 
    de Grazia, Victoria; Paggi, Leonardo (Autumn 1991). "Story of an Ordinary Massacre: Civitella della Chiana, 29 June, 1944". Cardozo Studies in Law and Literature. 3 (2): 153–69. doi:10.1525/lal.1991.3.2.02a00030. JSTOR 743479. 
    Dunn, Dennis J. (1998). Caught Between Roosevelt & Stalin: America's Ambassadors to Moscow. Lexington, KY: University Press of Kentucky. ISBN 978-0-8131-2023-2. 
    Eastman, Lloyd E. (1986). "Nationalist China during the Sino-Japanese War 1937–1945".  In John K. Fairbank and Denis Twitchett, eds., The Cambridge History of China, Volume 13: Republican China 1912–1949, Part 2. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-24338-4. 
    Ellman, Michael (2002). "Soviet Repression Statistics: Some Comments" (PDF) . Europe-Asia Studies. 54 (7): 1151–1172. doi:10.1080/0966813022000017177. JSTOR 826310. Archived from the original (PDF)  on 22 November 2012.  Copy
    ———; Maksudov, S. (1994). "Soviet Deaths in the Great Patriotic War: A Note" (PDF) . Europe-Asia Studies. 46 (4): 671–80. doi:10.1080/09668139408412190. JSTOR 152934. PMID 12288331. 
    Emadi-Coffin, Barbara (2002). Rethinking International Organization: Deregulation and Global Governance. London & New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-19540-9. 
    Erickson, John (2001). "Moskalenko". In Shukman, Harold (ed.). Stalin's Generals. London: Phoenix Press. pp. 137–54. ISBN 978-1-84212-513-7. 
    ——— (2003). The Road to Stalingrad. London: Cassell Military. ISBN 978-0-304-36541-8. 
    Evans, David C.; Peattie, Mark R. (2012) [1997]. Kaigun: Strategy, Tactics, and Technology in the Imperial Japanese Navy. Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press. ISBN 978-1-59114-244-7. 
    Evans, Richard J. (2008). The Third Reich at War. London: Allen Lane. ISBN 978-0-7139-9742-2. 
    Fairbank, John King; Goldman, Merle (2006) [1994]. China: A New History (2nd ed.). Cambridge: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-01828-0. 
    Farrell, Brian P. (1993). "Yes, Prime Minister: Barbarossa, Whipcord, and the Basis of British Grand Strategy, Autumn 1941". Journal of Military History. 57 (4): 599–625. doi:10.2307/2944096. JSTOR 2944096. 
    Ferguson, Niall (2006). The War of the World: Twentieth-Century Conflict and the Descent of the West. Penguin. ISBN 978-0-14-311239-6. 
    Fitzgerald, Stephanie (2011). Children of the Holocaust. Mankato, MN: Compass Point Books. ISBN 978-0-7565-4390-7. 
    Forrest, Glen; Evans, Anthony; Gibbons, David (2012). The Illustrated Timeline of Military History. New York: The Rosen Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-4488-4794-5. 
    Förster, Stig; Gessler, Myriam (2005). "The Ultimate Horror: Reflections on Total War and Genocide".  In Roger Chickering, Stig Förster and Bernd Greiner, eds., A World at Total War: Global Conflict and the Politics of Destruction, 1937–1945 (pp. 53–68) . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-83432-2. 
    Frei, Norbert (2002). Adenauer's Germany and the Nazi Past: The Politics of Amnesty and Integration. New York: Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-11882-8. 
    Gardiner, Robert; Brown, David K., eds. (2004). The Eclipse of the Big Gun: The Warship 1906–1945. London: Conway Maritime Press. ISBN 978-0-85177-953-9. 
    Garthoff, Raymond L. (1969). "The Soviet Manchurian Campaign, August 1945". Military Affairs. 33 (2): 312–36. doi:10.2307/1983926. JSTOR 1983926. 
    Garver, John W. (1988). Chinese-Soviet Relations, 1937–1945: The Diplomacy of Chinese Nationalism. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-505432-3. 
    Gilbert, Martin (2001). "Final Solution". In Dear, Ian; Foot, Richard D. (eds.). The Oxford Companion to World War II. Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 285–92. ISBN 978-0-19-280670-3. 
    Gilbert, Martin (1989). Second World War. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. ISBN 978-0-297-79616-9. 
    Glantz, David M. (1986). "Soviet Defensive Tactics at Kursk, July 1943". CSI Report No. 11. Combined Arms Research Library. OCLC 278029256. Archived from the original on 6 March 2008. Retrieved 15 July  2013 . 
    ——— (1989). Soviet Military Deception in the Second World War. Abingdon & New York: Frank Cass. ISBN 978-0-7146-3347-3. 
    ——— (1998). When Titans Clashed: How the Red Army Stopped Hitler. Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas. ISBN 978-0-7006-0899-7. 
    ——— (2001). "The Soviet-German War 1941–45 Myths and Realities: A Survey Essay" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF)  on 9 July 2011. 
    ——— (2002). The Battle for Leningrad: 1941–1944. Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas. ISBN 978-0-7006-1208-6. 
    ——— (2005). "August Storm: The Soviet Strategic Offensive in Manchuria". Leavenworth Papers. Combined Arms Research Library. OCLC 78918907. Archived from the original on 2 March 2008. Retrieved 15 July  2013 . 
    Goldstein, Margaret J. (2004). World War II: Europe. Minneapolis: Lerner Publications. ISBN 978-0-8225-0139-8. 
    Gordon, Andrew (2004). "The greatest military armada ever launched".  In Jane Penrose, ed., The D-Day Companion. Oxford: Osprey Publishing. pp. 127–144. ISBN 978-1-84176-779-6. 
    Gordon, Robert S.C. (2012). The Holocaust in Italian Culture, 1944–2010. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-6346-2. 
    Grove, Eric J. (1995). "A Service Vindicated, 1939–1946".  In J.R. Hill, ed., The Oxford Illustrated History of the Royal Navy . Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 348–80. ISBN 978-0-19-211675-8. 
    Hane, Mikiso (2001). Modern Japan: A Historical Survey (3rd ed.). Boulder, CO: Westview Press. ISBN 978-0-8133-3756-2. 
    Hanhimäki, Jussi M. (1997). Containing Coexistence: America, Russia, and the "Finnish Solution". Kent, OH: Kent State University Press. ISBN 978-0-87338-558-9. 
    Harris, Sheldon H. (2002). Factories of Death: Japanese Biological Warfare, 1932–1945, and the American Cover-up (2nd ed.). London & New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-93214-1. 
    Harrison, Mark (1998). "The economics of World War II: an overview".  In Mark Harrison, ed., The Economics of World War II: Six Great Powers in International Comparison. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 1–42. ISBN 978-0-521-62046-8. 
    Hart, Stephen; Hart, Russell; Hughes, Matthew (2000). The German Soldier in World War II. Osceola, WI: MBI Publishing Company. ISBN 978-1-86227-073-2. 
    Hauner, Milan (1978). "Did Hitler Want a World Dominion?". Journal of Contemporary History. 13 (1): 15–32. doi:10.1177/002200947801300102. JSTOR 260090. 
    Healy, Mark (1992). Kursk 1943: The Tide Turns in the East. Oxford: Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-85532-211-0. 
    Hearn, Chester G. (2007). Carriers in Combat: The Air War at Sea. Mechanicsburg, PA: Stackpole Books. ISBN 978-0-8117-3398-4. 
    Hedgepeth, Sonja; Saidel, Rochelle (2010). Sexual Violence against Jewish Women During the Holocaust. Lebanon, NH: University Press of New England. ISBN 978-1-58465-904-4. 
    Hempel, Andrew (2005). Poland in World War II: An Illustrated Military History. New York: Hippocrene Books. ISBN 978-0-7818-1004-3. 
    Herbert, Ulrich (1994). "Labor as spoils of conquest, 1933–1945".  In David F. Crew, ed., Nazism and German Society, 1933–1945. London & New York: Routledge. pp. 219–73. ISBN 978-0-415-08239-6. 
    Herf, Jeffrey (2003). "The Nazi Extermination Camps and the Ally to the East. Could the Red Army and Air Force Have Stopped or Slowed the Final Solution?". Kritika: Explorations in Russian and Eurasian History. 4 (4): 913–30. doi:10.1353/kri.2003.0059. 
    Hill, Alexander (2005). The War Behind The Eastern Front: The Soviet Partisan Movement In North-West Russia 1941–1944. London & New York: Frank Cass. ISBN 978-0-7146-5711-0. 
    Holland, James (2008). Italy's Sorrow: A Year of War 1944–45. London: HarperPress. ISBN 978-0-00-717645-8. 
    Hosking, Geoffrey A. (2006). Rulers and Victims: The Russians in the Soviet Union. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-02178-5. 
    Howard, Joshua H. (2004). Workers at War: Labor in China's Arsenals, 1937–1953. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-4896-4. 
    Hsu, Long-hsuen; Chang, Ming-kai (1971). History of The Sino-Japanese War (1937–1945) 2nd Ed. Chung Wu Publishers. ASIN B00005W210. 
    Ingram, Norman (2006). "Pacifism".  In Lawrence D. Kritzman and Brian J. Reilly, eds., The Columbia History Of Twentieth-Century French Thought. New York: Columbia University Press. pp. 76–78. ISBN 978-0-231-10791-4. 
    Iriye, Akira (1981). Power and Culture: The Japanese-American War, 1941–1945. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-69580-1. 
    Jackson, Ashley (2006). The British Empire and the Second World War. London & New York: Hambledon Continuum. ISBN 978-1-85285-417-1. 
    Joes, Anthony James (2004). Resisting Rebellion: The History And Politics of Counterinsurgency. Lexington: University Press of Kentucky. ISBN 978-0-8131-2339-4. 
    Jowett, Philip S. (2001). The Italian Army 1940–45, Volume 2: Africa 1940–43. Oxford: Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-85532-865-5. 
    ———; Andrew, Stephen (2002). The Japanese Army, 1931–45. Oxford: Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84176-353-8. 
    Jukes, Geoffrey (2001). "Kuznetzov". In Harold Shukman, ed., Stalin's Generals (pp. 109–16). London: Phoenix Press. ISBN 978-1-84212-513-7. 
    Kantowicz, Edward R. (1999). The Rage of Nations. Grand Rapids, MI: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company. ISBN 978-0-8028-4455-2. 
    ——— (2000). Coming Apart, Coming Together. Grand Rapids, MI: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company. ISBN 978-0-8028-4456-9. 
    Keeble, Curtis (1990). "The historical perspective".  In Alex Pravda and Peter J. Duncan, eds., Soviet-British Relations Since the 1970s. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-37494-1. 
    Keegan, John (1997). The Second World War. London: Pimlico. ISBN 978-0-7126-7348-8. 
    Kennedy, David M. (2001). Freedom from Fear: The American People in Depression and War, 1929–1945. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-514403-1. 
    Kennedy-Pipe, Caroline (1995). Stalin's Cold War: Soviet Strategies in Europe, 1943–56. Manchester: Manchester University Press. ISBN 978-0-7190-4201-0. 
    Kershaw, Ian (2001). Hitler, 1936–1945: Nemesis. New York: W.W. Norton]. ISBN 978-0-393-04994-7. 
    ——— (2007). Fateful Choices: Ten Decisions That Changed the World, 1940–1941. London: Allen Lane. ISBN 978-0-7139-9712-5. 
    Kitson, Alison (2001). Germany 1858–1990: Hope, Terror, and Revival. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-913417-5. 
    Klavans, Richard A.; Di Benedetto, C. Anthony; Prudom, Melanie J. (1997). "Understanding Competitive Interactions: The U.S. Commercial Aircraft Market". Journal of Managerial Issues. 9 (1): 13–361. JSTOR 40604127. 
    Kleinfeld, Gerald R. (1983). "Hitler's Strike for Tikhvin". Military Affairs. 47 (3): 122–128. doi:10.2307/1988082. JSTOR 1988082. 
    Koch, H.W. (1983). "Hitler's 'Programme' and the Genesis of Operation 'Barbarossa' ". The Historical Journal. 26 (4): 891–920. doi:10.1017/S0018246X00012747. JSTOR 2639289. 
    Kolko, Gabriel (1990) [1968]. The Politics of War: The World and United States Foreign Policy, 1943–1945. New York: Random House. ISBN 978-0-679-72757-6. 
    Laurier, Jim (2001). Tobruk 1941: Rommel's Opening Move. Oxford: Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84176-092-6. 
    Lee, En-han (2002). "The Nanking Massacre Reassessed: A Study of the Sino-Japanese Controversy over the Factual Number of Massacred Victims".  In Robert Sabella, Fei Fei Li and David Liu, eds., Nanking 1937: Memory and Healing (pp. 47–74) . Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe. ISBN 978-0-7656-0816-1. 
    Leffler, Melvyn P.; Westad, Odd Arne, eds. (2010). The Cambridge History of the Cold War (3 volumes) . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-83938-9. 
    Levine, Alan J. (1992). The Strategic Bombing of Germany, 1940–1945. Westport, CT: Praeger. ISBN 978-0-275-94319-6. 
    Lewis, Morton (1953). "Japanese Plans and American Defenses". In Greenfield, Kent Roberts (ed.). The Fall of the Philippines. Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office. LCCN 53-63678. 
    Liberman, Peter (1996). Does Conquest Pay?: The Exploitation of Occupied Industrial Societies. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-02986-3. 
    Liddell Hart, Basil (1977). History of the Second World War (4th ed.). London: Pan. ISBN 978-0-330-23770-3. 
    Lightbody, Bradley (2004). The Second World War: Ambitions to Nemesis. London & New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-22404-8. 
    Lindberg, Michael; Todd, Daniel (2001). Brown-, Green- and Blue-Water Fleets: the Influence of Geography on Naval Warfare, 1861 to the Present. Westport, CT: Praeger. ISBN 978-0-275-96486-3. 
    Lowe, C.J.; Marzari, F. (2002). Italian Foreign Policy 1870–1940. London: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-26681-9. 
    Lynch, Michael (2010). The Chinese Civil War 1945–49. Oxford: Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84176-671-3. 
    Macksey, Kenneth (1997) [1979]. Rommel: Battles and Campaigns. Cambridge, MA: Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0-306-80786-2. 
    Maddox, Robert James (1992). The United States and World War II. Boulder, CO: Westview Press. ISBN 978-0-8133-0437-3. 
    Maingot, Anthony P. (1994). The United States and the Caribbean: Challenges of an Asymmetrical Relationship. Boulder, CO: Westview Press. ISBN 978-0-8133-2241-4. 
    Mandelbaum, Michael (1988). The Fate of Nations: The Search for National Security in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries. Cambridge University Press. p. 96. ISBN 978-0-521-35790-6. 
    Marston, Daniel (2005). The Pacific War Companion: From Pearl Harbor to Hiroshima. Oxford: Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84176-882-3. 
    Masaya, Shiraishi (1990). Japanese Relations with Vietnam, 1951–1987. Ithaca, NY: SEAP Publications. ISBN 978-0-87727-122-2. 
    May, Ernest R. (1955). "The United States, the Soviet Union, and the Far Eastern War, 1941–1945". Pacific Historical Review. 24 (2): 153–74. doi:10.2307/3634575. JSTOR 3634575. 
    Mazower, Mark (2008). Hitler's Empire: Nazi Rule in Occupied Europe. London: Allen Lane. ISBN 978-1-59420-188-2. 
    Milner, Marc (1990). "The Battle of the Atlantic".  In John Gooch, ed., Decisive Campaigns of the Second World War (pp. 45–66) . Abingdon: Frank Cass. ISBN 978-0-7146-3369-5. 
    Milward, A.S. (1964). "The End of the Blitzkrieg". The Economic History Review. 16 (3): 499–518. doi:10.2307/2592851. JSTOR 2592851. 
    ——— (1992) [1977]. War, Economy, and Society, 1939–1945. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-03942-1. 
    Minford, Patrick (1993). "Reconstruction and the UK Postwar Welfare State: False Start and New Beginning".  In Rudiger Dornbusch, Wilhelm Nölling and Richard Layard, eds., Postwar Economic Reconstruction and Lessons for the East Today (pp. 115–38) . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-04136-2. 
    Mingst, Karen A.; Karns, Margaret P. (2007). United Nations in the Twenty-First Century (3rd ed.). Boulder, CO: Westview Press. ISBN 978-0-8133-4346-4. 
    Miscamble, Wilson D. (2007). From Roosevelt to Truman: Potsdam, Hiroshima, and the Cold War. New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-86244-8. 
    Mitcham, Samuel W. (2007) [1982]. Rommel's Desert War: The Life and Death of the Afrika Korps. Mechanicsburg, PA: Stackpole Books. ISBN 978-0-8117-3413-4. 
    Mitter, Rana (2014). Forgotten Ally: China's World War II, 1937–1945. Mariner Books. ISBN 978-0-544-33450-2. 
    Molinari, Andrea (2007). Desert Raiders: Axis and Allied Special Forces 1940–43. Oxford: Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84603-006-2. 
    Morison, Samuel Eliot (2002). History of United States Naval Operations in World War II, Volume 14: Victory in the Pacific, 1945. Champaign, IL: University of Illinois Press. ISBN 978-0-252-07065-5. 
    Murray, Williamson (1983). Strategy for Defeat: The Luftwaffe, 1933–1945. Maxwell Air Force Base, AL: Air University Press. ISBN 978-1-4294-9235-5. 
    ———; Millett, Allan Reed (2001). A War to Be Won: Fighting the Second World War. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-00680-5. 
    Myers, Ramon; Peattie, Mark (1987). The Japanese Colonial Empire, 1895–1945. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-10222-1. 
    Naimark, Norman (2010). "The Sovietization of Eastern Europe, 1944–1953".  In Melvyn P. Leffler and Odd Arne Westad, eds., The Cambridge History of the Cold War, Volume I: Origins (pp. 175–97) . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-83719-4. 
    Neary, Ian (1992). "Japan".  In Martin Harrop, ed., Power and Policy in Liberal Democracies (pp. 49–70) . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-34579-8. 
    Neillands, Robin (2005). The Dieppe Raid: The Story of the Disastrous 1942 Expedition. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press. ISBN 978-0-253-34781-7. 

        Neulen, Hans Werner (2000). In the skies of Europe – Air Forces allied to the Luftwaffe 1939–1945. Ramsbury, Marlborough, UK: The Crowood Press. ISBN 1-86126-799-1. 

    Niewyk, Donald L.; Nicosia, Francis (2000). The Columbia Guide to the Holocaust. New York: Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-11200-0. 
    Overy, Richard (1994). War and Economy in the Third Reich. New York: Clarendon Press. ISBN 978-0-19-820290-5. 
    ——— (1995). Why the Allies Won. London: Pimlico. ISBN 978-0-7126-7453-9. 
    ——— (2004). The Dictators: Hitler's Germany, Stalin's Russia. New York: W.W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-02030-4. 
    ———; Wheatcroft, Andrew (1999). The Road to War (2nd ed.). London: Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-028530-7. 
    O'Reilly, Charles T. (2001). Forgotten Battles: Italy's War of Liberation, 1943–1945. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books. ISBN 978-0-7391-0195-7. 
    Painter, David S. (2012). "Oil and the American Century" (PDF) . The Journal of American History. 99 (1): 24–39. doi:10.1093/jahist/jas073. 
    Padfield, Peter (1998). War Beneath the Sea: Submarine Conflict During World War II. New York: John Wiley. ISBN 978-0-471-24945-0. 
    Pape, Robert A. (1993). "Why Japan Surrendered". International Security. 18 (2): 154–201. doi:10.2307/2539100. JSTOR 2539100. 
    Parker, Danny S. (2004). Battle of the Bulge: Hitler's Ardennes Offensive, 1944–1945 (New ed.). Cambridge, MA: Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0-306-81391-7. 
    Payne, Stanley G. (2008). Franco and Hitler: Spain, Germany, and World War II. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-12282-4. 
    Perez, Louis G. (1998). The History of Japan. Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-313-30296-1. 
    Petrov, Vladimir (1967). Money and Conquest: Allied Occupation Currencies in World War II. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 978-0-8018-0530-1. 
    Polley, Martin (2000). An A–Z of Modern Europe Since 1789. London & New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-18597-4. 
    Portelli, Alessandro (2003). The Order Has Been Carried Out: History, Memory, and Meaning of a Nazi Massacre in Rome. Basingstoke & New YorkPalgrave Macmillan978-1403980083. 
    Preston, P. W. (1998). Pacific Asia in the Global System: An Introduction. Oxford & Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers. ISBN 978-0-631-20238-7. 
    Prins, Gwyn (2002). The Heart of War: On Power, Conflict and Obligation in the Twenty-First Century. London & New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-36960-2. 
    Radtke, K.W. (1997). "' Strategic' concepts underlying the so-called Hirota foreign policy, 1933–7".  In Aiko Ikeo, ed., Economic Development in Twentieth Century East Asia: The International Context (pp. 100–20) . London & New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-14900-6. 
    Rahn, Werner (2001). "The War in the Pacific".  In Horst Boog, Werner Rahn, Reinhard Stumpf and Bernd Wegner, eds., Germany and the Second World War, Volume VI: The Global War (pp. 191–298) . Oxford: Clarendon Press. ISBN 978-0-19-822888-2. 
    Ratcliff, R.A. (2006). Delusions of Intelligence: Enigma, Ultra, and the End of Secure Ciphers. New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-85522-8. 
    Read, Anthony (2004). The Devil's Disciples: Hitler's Inner Circle. New York: W.W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-04800-1. 
    Read, Anthony; Fisher, David (2002) [1992]. The Fall Of Berlin. London: Pimlico. ISBN 978-0-7126-0695-0. 
    Record, Jeffery (2005). Appeasement Reconsidered: Investigating the Mythology of the 1930s (PDF) . Diane Publishing. p. 50. ISBN 978-1-58487-216-0. Retrieved 15 November  2009 . 
    Rees, Laurence (2008). World War II Behind Closed Doors: Stalin, the Nazis and the West. London: BBC Books. ISBN 978-0-563-49335-8. 
    Regan, Geoffrey (2004). The Brassey's Book of Military Blunders. Brassey's. ISBN 978-1-57488-252-0. 
    Reinhardt, Klaus (1992). Moscow – The Turning Point: The Failure of Hitler's Strategy in the Winter of 1941–42. Oxford: Berg. ISBN 978-0-85496-695-0. 
    Reynolds, David (2006). From World War to Cold War: Churchill, Roosevelt, and the International History of the 1940s. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-928411-5. 
    Rich, Norman (1992) [1973]. Hitler's War Aims, Volume I: Ideology, the Nazi State, and the Course of Expansion. New York: W.W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-00802-9. 
    Ritchie, Ella (1992). "France".  In Martin Harrop, ed., Power and Policy in Liberal Democracies (pp. 23–48) . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-34579-8. 
    Roberts, Cynthia A. (1995). "Planning for War: The Red Army and the Catastrophe of 1941". Europe-Asia Studies. 47 (8): 1293–1326. doi:10.1080/09668139508412322. JSTOR 153299. 
    Roberts, Geoffrey (2006). Stalin's Wars: From World War to Cold War, 1939–1953. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-11204-7. 
    Roberts, J.M. (1997). The Penguin History of Europe. London: Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-026561-3. 
    Ropp, Theodore (2000). War in the Modern World (Revised ed.). Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 978-0-8018-6445-2. 
    Roskill, S.W. (1954). The War at Sea 1939–1945, Volume 1: The Defensive. History of the Second World War. United Kingdom Military Series. London: HMSO. 
    Ross, Steven T. (1997). American War Plans, 1941–1945: The Test of Battle. Abingdon & New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-7146-4634-3. 
    Rottman, Gordon L. (2002). World War II Pacific Island Guide: A Geo-Military Study. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-31395-0. 
    Rotundo, Louis (1986). "The Creation of Soviet Reserves and the 1941 Campaign". Military Affairs. 50 (1): 21–28. doi:10.2307/1988530. JSTOR 1988530. 
    Salecker, Gene Eric (2001). Fortress Against the Sun: The B-17 Flying Fortress in the Pacific. Conshohocken, PA: Combined Publishing. ISBN 978-1-58097-049-5. 
    Schain, Martin A., ed. (2001). The Marshall Plan Fifty Years Later. London: Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-333-92983-4. 
    Schmitz, David F. (2000). Henry L. Stimson: The First Wise Man. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-8420-2632-1. 
    Schofield, B.B. (1981). "The Defeat of the U-Boats during World War II". Journal of Contemporary History. 16 (1): 119–29. doi:10.1177/002200948101600107. JSTOR 260619. 
    Schoppa, R. Keith (2011). In a Sea of Bitterness, Refugees during the Sino-Japanese War. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-05988-7. 
    Sella, Amnon (1978). "" Barbarossa": Surprise Attack and Communication". Journal of Contemporary History. 13 (3): 555–83. doi:10.1177/002200947801300308. JSTOR 260209. 
    ——— (1983). "Khalkhin-Gol: The Forgotten War". Journal of Contemporary History. 18 (4): 651–87. JSTOR 260307. 
    Senn, Alfred Erich (2007). Lithuania 1940: Revolution from Above. Amsterdam & New York: Rodopi. ISBN 978-90-420-2225-6. 
    Shaw, Anthony (2000). World War II: Day by Day. Osceola, WI: MBI Publishing Company. ISBN 978-0-7603-0939-1. 
    Shepardson, Donald E. (1998). "The Fall of Berlin and the Rise of a Myth". Journal of Military History. 62 (1): 135–54. doi:10.2307/120398. JSTOR 120398. 
    Shirer, William L. (1990) [1960]. The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich: A History of Nazi Germany. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-671-72868-7. 
    Shore, Zachary (2003). What Hitler Knew: The Battle for Information in Nazi Foreign Policy. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-518261-3. 
    Slim, William (1956). Defeat into Victory. London: Cassell. ISBN 978-0-304-29114-4. 
    Smith, Alan (1993). Russia and the World Economy: Problems of Integration. London: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-08924-1. 
    Smith, J.W. (1994). The World's Wasted Wealth 2: Save Our Wealth, Save Our Environment. Institute for Economic Democracy. ISBN 978-0-9624423-2-2. 
    Smith, Peter C. (2002) [1970]. Pedestal: The Convoy That Saved Malta (5th ed.). Manchester: Goodall. ISBN 978-0-907579-19-9. 
    Smith, David J.; Pabriks, Artis; Purs, Aldis; Lane, Thomas (2002). The Baltic States: Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. London: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-28580-3. 
    Smith, Winston; Steadman, Ralph (2004). All Riot on the Western Front, Volume 3. Last Gasp. ISBN 978-0-86719-616-0. 
    Snyder, Timothy (2010). Bloodlands: Europe Between Hitler and Stalin. London: The Bodley Head. ISBN 978-0-224-08141-2. 
    Sommerville, Donald (2008). The Complete Illustrated History of World War Two: An Authoritative Account of the Deadliest Conflict in Human History with Analysis of Decisive Encounters and Landmark Engagements. Leicester: Lorenz Books. ISBN 978-0-7548-1898-4. 
    Spring, D. W. (1986). "The Soviet Decision for War against Finland, 30 November 1939". Soviet Studies. 38 (2): 207–26. doi:10.1080/09668138608411636. JSTOR 151203. 
    Steinberg, Jonathan (1995). "The Third Reich Reflected: German Civil Administration in the Occupied Soviet Union, 1941–4". The English Historical Review. 110 (437): 620–51. doi:10.1093/ehr/cx.437.620. JSTOR 578338. 
    Steury, Donald P. (1987). "Naval Intelligence, the Atlantic Campaign and the Sinking of the Bismarck: A Study in the Integration of Intelligence into the Conduct of Naval Warfare". Journal of Contemporary History. 22 (2): 209–33. doi:10.1177/002200948702200202. JSTOR 260931. 
    Stueck, William (2010). "The Korean War".  In Melvyn P. Leffler and Odd Arne Westad, eds., The Cambridge History of the Cold War, Volume I: Origins (pp. 266–87) . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-83719-4. 
    Sumner, Ian; Baker, Alix (2001). The Royal Navy 1939–45. Oxford: Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84176-195-4. 
    Swain, Bruce (2001). A Chronology of Australian Armed Forces at War 1939–45. Crows Nest: Allen & Unwin. ISBN 978-1-86508-352-0. 
    Swain, Geoffrey (1992). "The Cominform: Tito's International?". The Historical Journal. 35 (3): 641–63. doi:10.1017/S0018246X00026017. 
    Tanaka, Yuki (1996). Hidden Horrors: Japanese War Crimes in World War II. Boulder, CO: Westview Press. ISBN 978-0-8133-2717-4. 
    Taylor, A.J.P. (1961). The Origins of the Second World War. London: Hamish Hamilton. 
    ——— (1979). How Wars Begin. London: Hamish Hamilton. ISBN 978-0-241-10017-2. 
    Taylor, Jay (2009). The Generalissimo: Chiang Kai-shek and the Struggle for Modern China. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-03338-2. 
    Thomas, Nigel; Andrew, Stephen (1998). German Army 1939–1945 (2): North Africa & Balkans. Oxford: Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-85532-640-8. 
    Thompson, John Herd; Randall, Stephen J. (2008). Canada and the United States: Ambivalent Allies (4th ed.). Athens, GA: University of Georgia Press. ISBN 978-0-8203-3113-3. 
    Trachtenberg, Marc (1999). A Constructed Peace: The Making of the European Settlement, 1945–1963. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-00273-6. 
    Tucker, Spencer C.; Roberts, Priscilla Mary (2004). Encyclopedia of World War II: A Political, Social, and Military History. ABC-CIO. ISBN 978-1-57607-999-7. 
    Umbreit, Hans (1991). "The Battle for Hegemony in Western Europe".  In P. S. Falla, ed., Germany and the Second World War, Volume 2: Germany's Initial Conquests in Europe (pp. 227–326) . Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-822885-1. 
    United States Army (1986) [1953]. The German Campaigns in the Balkans (Spring 1941). Washington, DC: Department of the Army. 
    Waltz, Susan (2002). "Reclaiming and Rebuilding the History of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights". Third World Quarterly. 23 (3): 437–48. doi:10.1080/01436590220138378. JSTOR 3993535. 
    Ward, Thomas A. (2010). Aerospace Propulsion Systems. Singapore: John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-0-470-82497-9. 
    Watson, William E. (2003). Tricolor and Crescent: France and the Islamic World. Westport, CT: Praeger. ISBN 978-0-275-97470-1. 
    Weinberg, Gerhard L. (2005). A World at Arms: A Global History of World War II (2nd ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-85316-3. ; comprehensive overview with emphasis on diplomacy
    Wettig, Gerhard (2008). Stalin and the Cold War in Europe: The Emergence and Development of East-West Conflict, 1939–1953. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-7425-5542-6. 
    Wiest, Andrew; Barbier, M.K. (2002). Strategy and Tactics: Infantry Warfare. St Paul, MN: MBI Publishing Company. ISBN 978-0-7603-1401-2. 
    Williams, Andrew (2006). Liberalism and War: The Victors and the Vanquished. Abingdon & New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-35980-1. 
    Wilt, Alan F. (1981). "Hitler's Late Summer Pause in 1941". Military Affairs. 45 (4): 187–91. doi:10.2307/1987464. JSTOR 1987464. 
    Wohlstetter, Roberta (1962). Pearl Harbor: Warning and Decision. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-0597-4. 
    Wolf, Holger C. (1993). "The Lucky Miracle: Germany 1945–1951".  In Rudiger Dornbusch, Wilhelm Nölling and Richard Layard, eds., Postwar Economic Reconstruction and Lessons for the East Today (pp. 29–56) . Cambridge: MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-04136-2. 
    Wood, James B. (2007). Japanese Military Strategy in the Pacific War: Was Defeat Inevitable?. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-7425-5339-2. 
    Yoder, Amos (1997). The Evolution of the United Nations System (3rd ed.). London & Washington, DC: Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-1-56032-546-8. 
    Zalampas, Michael (1989). Adolf Hitler and the Third Reich in American magazines, 1923–1939. Bowling Green University Popular Press. ISBN 978-0-87972-462-7. 
    Zaloga, Steven J. (1996). Bagration 1944: The Destruction of Army Group Centre. Oxford: Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-85532-478-7. 
    ——— (2002). Poland 1939: The Birth of Blitzkrieg. Oxford: Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84176-408-5. 
    Zeiler, Thomas W. (2004). Unconditional Defeat: Japan, America, and the End of World War II. Wilmington, DE: Scholarly Resources. ISBN 978-0-8420-2991-9. 
    Zetterling, Niklas; Tamelander, Michael (2009).  Bismarck: The Final Days of Germany's Greatest Battleship. Drexel Hill, PA: Casemate. ISBN 978-1-935149-04-0. 

External links 
World War IIat Wikipedia's sister projects 

     Definitions from Wiktionary 
     Media from Wikimedia Commons 
     News from Wikinews 
     Quotations from Wikiquote 
     Texts from Wikisource 
     Textbooks from Wikibooks 
     Travel guide from Wikivoyage 
     Resources from Wikiversity 

    World War II (1939–1945) at the Encyclopædia Britannica
    West Point Maps of the European War
    West Point Maps of the Asian-Pacific War
    Atlas of the World Battle Fronts (July 1943 to August 1945)
    Records of World War II propaganda posters are held by Simon Fraser University's Special Collections and Rare Books
    Maps of World War II in Europe at Omniatlas

    v
    t
    e

World War II

    Outline
    Military engagements
        Battles
        Operations
    Commanders
    Casualties
    Conferences

General
Topics

    Air warfare of World War II
        In Europe
    Blitzkrieg
    Comparative military ranks
    Cryptography
    Declarations of war
    Diplomacy
    Home front
        United States
        Australian
        United Kingdom
    Lend-Lease
    Manhattan Project
    Military awards
    Military equipment
    Military production
    Naval history
    Nazi plunder
    Opposition
    Technology
        Allied cooperation
    Total war
    Strategic bombing
    Puppet states
    Women
    Art and World War II

Theaters

    Asia and Pacific
        China
        South-East Asia
        North and Central Pacific
        South-West Pacific
    Europe
        Western Front
        Eastern Front
    Mediterranean and Middle East
        North Africa
        East Africa
        Italy
    West Africa
    Atlantic
    North America
    South America

Aftermath

    Expulsion of Germans
    Paperclip
    Osoaviakhim
    Keelhaul
    Occupation of Germany
    Territorial changes of Germany
    Soviet occupations
        Romania
        Poland
        Hungary
        Baltic
    Occupation of Japan
    First Indochina War
    Indonesian National Revolution
    Chinese Civil War
    Division of Korea
    Cold War
    Decolonization
    Treaty on the Final Settlement with Respect to Germany

War crimes

    Allied war crimes
        Soviet war crimes
        British war crimes
        United States war crimes
    German war crimes
        forced labour
        Wehrmacht war crimes
        The Holocaust
            Aftermath
        Response
        Nuremberg trials
    Italian war crimes
    Japanese war crimes
        Unit 731
        Prosecution
    Croatian war crimes
        Persecution of Serbs
        Persecution of Jews
    Romanian war crimes
    Sexual violence
        German military brothels
        Camp brothels
        Rape during the occupation of Japan
            Sook Ching
            Comfort women
        Rape of Nanking
        Rape of Manila
        Rape during the occupation of Germany
        Rape during the liberation of France
        Rape during the Soviet occupation of Poland

Participants
Allies

    Australia
    Belgium
    Brazil
    Canada
    China
    Cuba
    Czechoslovakia
    Denmark
    Ethiopia
    France
    Free France
    Greece
    India
    Italy (from September 1943)
    Luxembourg
    Mexico
    Netherlands
    New Zealand
    Norway
    Philippines
    Poland
    South Africa
    Southern Rhodesia
    Soviet Union
    Tuva
    United Kingdom
    United States
        Puerto Rico
    Yugoslavia

Axis

    Albania
    Bulgaria
    China
    Croatia
    Finland
    Germany
    Hungary
    Free India
    Iraq
    Italy (until September 1943
    Italian Social Republic
    Japan
    Manchukuo
    Philippines
    Romania
    Slovakia
    Thailand
    Vichy France

Resistance

    Albania
    Austria
    Belgium
    Bulgaria
    Czech lands
    Denmark
    Estonia
    Ethiopia
    France
    Germany
    Greece
    Hong Kong
    Italy
    Japan
    Jews
    Korea
    Latvia
    Lithuania
    Luxembourg
    Malaya
    Netherlands
    Northeast China
    Norway
    Philippines
    Poland
    Romania
    Thailand
    Soviet Union
    Slovakia
    Western Ukraine
    Vietnam
    Yugoslavia

POWs

    Finnish prisoners in the Soviet Union
    German prisoners in the Soviet Union
    German prisoners in the United States
    Italian prisoners in the Soviet Union
    Japanese prisoners
        In the Soviet Union
    Soviet prisoner mistreatment by Germans
    Polish prisoners in the Soviet Union
    Romanian prisoners in the Soviet Union
    Soviet prisoners in Finland

Timeline
Prelude

    Africa
    Asia
    Europe

1939

    Poland
    Phoney War
    Winter War
    Atlantic
    Changsha
    China

1940

    Weserübung
    Netherlands
    Belgium
    France
        Armistice of 22 June 1940
    Britain
    North Africa
    West Africa
    British Somaliland
    North China
    Baltic States
    Moldova
    Indochina
    Greece
    Compass

1941

    East Africa
    Yugoslavia
    Shanggao
    Greece
    Crete
    Iraq
    Soviet Union
    Finland
    Lithuania
    Syria and Lebanon
    Kiev
    Iran
    Leningrad
    Gorky
    Moscow
    Sevastopol
    Pearl Harbor
    Hong Kong
    Philippines
    Changsha
    Malaya
    Borneo (1941–1942)
    Greek famine of 1941–1944

1942

    Burma
    Changsha
    Java Sea
    Coral Sea
    Gazala
    Dutch Harbor
    Attu (occupation)
    Kiska
    Zhejiang-Jiangxi
    Midway
    Rzhev
    Blue
    Stalingrad
    Singapore
    Dieppe
    El Alamein
    Guadalcanal
    Torch
    Chinese famine of 1942–1943

1943

    Tunisia
    Kursk
    Smolensk
    Gorky
    Solomon Islands
    Attu
    Sicily
    Cottage
    Lower Dnieper
    Italy
        Armistice of Cassibile
    Gilbert and Marshall Islands
    Burma
    Northern Burma and Western Yunnan
    Changde
    Bengal famine of 1943
    Ruzagayura famine of 1943–1944

1944

    Monte Cassino / Shingle
    Narva
    Korsun–Cherkassy
    Tempest
    Ichi-Go
    Overlord
    Neptune
    Normandy
    Mariana and Palau
    Bagration
    Western Ukraine
    Tannenberg Line
    Warsaw
    Eastern Romania
    Belgrade
    Paris
    Dragoon
    Gothic Line
    Market Garden
    Estonia
    Crossbow
    Pointblank
    Lapland
    Hungary
    Leyte
    Ardennes
        Bodenplatte
    Philippines (1944–1945)
    Burma (1944–1945)
    Dutch famine of 1944–1945

1945

    Vistula–Oder
    Iwo Jima
    Western invasion of Germany
    Okinawa
    Italy (Spring 1945)
    Borneo
    Syrmian Front
    Berlin
    Czechoslovakia
    Budapest
    West Hunan
    Guangxi
    Surrender of Germany
    Project Hula
    Manchuria
    Manila
    Borneo
    Taipei
    Atomic bombings
        Debate
    Kuril Islands
        Shumshu
    Vietnamese famine of 1945
    Surrender of Japan
        End of World War II in Asia

    Bibliography
    Category
    Index
    Portal

    v
    t
    e

History of World War II by region and country
Africa

    Belgian Congo
    British Somaliland
    Egypt
    French West Africa
    French Somaliland
    Gold Coast
    Kenya
    Liberia
    Nyasaland
    Madagascar
    South Africa
    Southern Rhodesia
    North Africa
        Tunisia

North America

    Canada
    Cuba
    El Salvador
    Greenland
    Mexico
    Newfoundland
    Panama
    United States
        Arizona
        Nevada
        New Mexico
        Puerto Rico

South America

    Argentina
    Brazil
    British Guiana
    Colombia
    Latin America
    Uruguay
    Venezuela

Asia

    Burma
    Ceylon
    China
        Manchuria
    Dutch East Indies
    Hong Kong
    India
    Indochina
    Iran
    Iraq
    Japan
    Malaya
    Mongolia
    Nepal
    Philippines
    Sarawak, Brunei, Labuan, and British North Borneo
    Singapore
    Thailand
    Turkey
    Tuva

Europe

    Albania
    Austria
    Belgium
    Bulgaria
    Czechoslovakia
    Denmark
    Estonia
    Finland
    France
        Basque Country
    Germany
    Greece
    Hungary (Carpathian Ruthenia)
    Iceland
    Ireland
    Italy
    Latvia
    Liechtenstein
    Lithuania
    Luxembourg
    Netherlands
    Norway
    Poland
    Portugal
    Romania
    Slovakia
    Slovenia
    Soviet Union
        Azerbaijan
        Belarus
        Ukraine
    Spain
        Catalonia
        Galicia
    Sweden
    Switzerland
    United Kingdom
        British Empire
        Channel Islands
        Gibraltar
    Vatican City
    Yugoslavia

Oceania

    Australia
    Nauru
    New Zealand
    Pacific Islands

Authority control [Image: Edit this at Wikidata]  

    BNE: XX526764  
    BNF: cb11996115g (data)  
    GND: 4079167-1  
    HDS: 8927  
    LCCN: sh85148273  
    LIR: 1129  
    NARA: 10644634  
    NDL: 00570524  
    NKC: ph117270  
    SELIBR: 139432  


Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=World_War_II&oldid=908655364"
Categories:

    World Wars
    World War II
    Conflicts in 1939
    Conflicts in 1940
    Conflicts in 1941
    Conflicts in 1942
    Conflicts in 1943
    Conflicts in 1944
    Conflicts in 1945
    Global conflicts
    Modern Europe
    Modern history
    Nuclear warfare
    War
    Wars involving Albania
    Wars involving Australia
    Wars involving Austria
    Wars involving Belgium
    Wars involving Bolivia
    Wars involving Brazil
    Wars involving British India
    Wars involving Bulgaria
    Wars involving Myanmar
    Wars involving Cambodia
    Wars involving Canada
    Wars involving Chile
    Wars involving Colombia
    Wars involving Costa Rica
    Wars involving Croatia
    Wars involving Cuba
    Wars involving Czechoslovakia
    Wars involving Denmark
    Wars involving Ecuador
    Wars involving Egypt
    Wars involving El Salvador
    Wars involving Estonia
    Wars involving Ethiopia
    Wars involving Finland
    Wars involving France
    Wars involving Germany
    Wars involving Greece
    Wars involving Guatemala
    Wars involving Haiti
    Wars involving Honduras
    Wars involving Hungary
    Wars involving Iceland
    Wars involving Indonesia
    Wars involving Italy
    Wars involving Iran
    Wars involving Iraq
    Wars involving Japan
    Wars involving Laos
    Wars involving Latvia
    Wars involving Lebanon
    Wars involving Liberia
    Wars involving Lithuania
    Wars involving Luxembourg
    Wars involving Mexico
    Wars involving Mongolia
    Wars involving Montenegro
    Wars involving Nepal
    Wars involving Norway
    Wars involving Nicaragua
    Wars involving Panama
    Wars involving Paraguay
    Wars involving Peru
    Wars involving Poland
    Wars involving Rhodesia
    Wars involving Romania
    Wars involving Saudi Arabia
    Wars involving Serbia
    Wars involving Slovakia
    Wars involving Slovenia
    Wars involving South Africa
    Wars involving Sri Lanka
    Wars involving Syria
    Wars involving Thailand
    Wars involving the Dominican Republic
    Wars involving the Netherlands
    Wars involving the Philippines
    Wars involving the Republic of China
    Wars involving the Soviet Union
    Wars involving the United Kingdom
    Wars involving the United States
    Wars involving Uruguay
    Wars involving Venezuela
    Wars involving Vietnam
    Wars involving Yugoslavia

Hidden categories:

    Webarchive template wayback links
    CS1 maint: Archived copy as title
    CS1 Polish-language sources (pl)
    Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages
    Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages
    Articles with short description
    EngvarB from July 2014
    Use dmy dates from January 2018
    All articles with unsourced statements
    Articles with unsourced statements from September 2018
    Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2016
    Articles with unsourced statements from July 2019
    Articles with Encyclopædia Britannica links
    Wikipedia articles with BNE identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with HDS identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with LIR identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with NARA identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with NKC identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiers
    Good articles

Navigation menu
Personal tools

    Not logged in
    Talk
    Contributions
    Create account
    Log in

Namespaces

    Article 
    Talk 

Variants 

Views

    Read 
    View source 
    View history 

More 

Search
Navigation

    Main page
    Contents
    Featured content
    Current events
    Random article
    Donate to Wikipedia
    Wikipedia store

Interaction

    Help
    About Wikipedia
    Community portal
    Recent changes
    Contact page

Tools

    What links here
    Related changes
    Upload file
    Special pages
    Permanent link
    Page information
    Wikidata item
    Cite this page

In other projects

    Wikimedia Commons
    Wikinews
    Wikiquote
    Wikiversity
    Wikivoyage

Print/export

    Create a book
    Download as PDF
    Printable version

Languages

    Адыгэбзэ
    Afrikaans
    Alemannisch
    አማርኛ
    Ænglisc
    العربية
    Aragonés
    অসমীয়া
    Asturianu
    Avañe'ẽ
    Azərbaycanca
    تۆرکجه
    বাংলা
    B'n-l'm-gú
    Basa Banyumasan
    Башҡортса
    Беларуская
    Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎
    भोजपुरी
    Bikol Central
    Bislama
    Български
    Boarisch
    བོད་ཡིག
    Bosanski
    Brezhoneg
    Буряад
    Català
    Чӑвашла
    Cebuano
    Čeština
    Chavacano de Zamboanga
    Chi-Chewa
    ChiShona
    Corsu
    Cymraeg
    Dansk
    Davvisámegiella
    Deutsch
    Diné bizaad
    Dolnoserbski
    डोटेली
    Eesti
    Ελληνικά
    Emiliàn e rumagnòl
    Español
    Esperanto
    Estremeñu
    Euskara
    فارسی
    Fiji Hindi
    Føroyskt
    Français
    Frysk
    Furlan
    Gaeilge
    Gaelg
    Gàidhlig
    Galego
    贛語
    ગુજરાતી
    客家語/Hak-k'-ngî
    한국어
    Hausa
    Հայերեն
    Արեւմտահայերէն
    हिन्दी
    Hornjoserbsce
    Hrvatski
    Ido
    Ilokano
    Bahasa Indonesia
    Interlingua
    Ирон
    Íslenska
    Italiano
    עברית
    Jawa
    Kabɩyɛ
    ಕನ್ನಡ
    Къарачай-малкъар
    ქართული
    Қазақша
    Kernowek
    Kiswahili
    Kreyòl ayisyen
    Kurdî
    Кыргызча
    Ladino
    ລາວ
    لۊری شومالی
    Latina
    Latviešu
    Lëtzebuergesch
    Лезги
    Lietuvių
    Ligure
    Limburgs
    Lingua Franca Nova
    La .lojban.
    Lumbaart
    Magyar
    मैथिली
    Македонски
    Malagasy
    മലയാളം
    Malti
    मराठी
    მარგალური
    مصرى
    مازِرونی
    Bahasa Melayu
    Minangkabau
    Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄
    Mirandés
    Монгол
    မြန်မာဘာသာ
    Nāhuatl
    Dorerin Naoero
    Nederlands
    Nedersaksies
    नेपाली
    नेपाल भाषा
    日本語
    Napulitano
    Nordfriisk
    Norfuk / Pitkern
    Norsk
    Norsk nynorsk
    Occitan
    Олык марий
    ଓଡ଼ିଆ
    Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча
    ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
    Pälzisch
    پنجابی
    Papiamentu
    پښتو
    Patois
    ភាសាខ្មែរ
    Picard
    Piemontèis
    Plattdüütsch
    Polski
    Português
    Qırımtatarca
    Ripoarisch
    Rom'nă
    Rumantsch
    Runa Simi
    Русиньскый
    Русский
    Саха тыла
    ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ
    संस्कृतम्
    Sardu
    Scots
    Seeltersk
    Shqip
    Sicilianu
    සිංහල
    Simple English
    سنڌي
    Slovenčina
    Slovenščina
    Ślůnski
    Soomaaliga
    کوردی
    Српски / srpski
    Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
    Basa Sunda
    Suomi
    Svenska
    Tagalog
    தமிழ்
    Taqbaylit
    Tarandíne
    Татарча/tatarça
    తెలుగు
    ไทย
    Тоҷикӣ
    Türkçe
    Türkmençe
    Тыва дыл
    Thuɔŋjäŋ
    Українська
    اردو
    ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche
    Vèneto
    Vepsän kel’
    Tiếng Việt
    Volapük
    Võro
    Walon
    文言
    West-Vlams
    Winaray
    Wolof
    吴语
    ייִדיש
    Yorùbá
    粵語
    Zazaki
    Zeêuws
    Žemaitėška
    中文

Edit links 

    This page was last edited on 31 July 2019, at 03:34 (UTC) .
    Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

    Privacy policy
    About Wikipedia
    Disclaimers
    Contact Wikipedia
    Developers
    Cookie statement
    Mobile view

    [Image: Wikimedia Foundation]  	
    [Image: Powered by MediaWiki]  	



Textise: Back to top
This text-only page was created by Textise (www.textise.net) © Textise - CPC LLC
To find out more about our product, visit Textise.org.


-------------------------------------------------



Are you a webmaster? Find out how to easily add Textise to your web site.

This page has been Textised!
The original page address was https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Manhattan_Project
For sharing use http://tinyurl.com/hpffh68

Here are some options:

- Back to original page (in this window | in a new window)
- Convert this page to a PDF
- Print this page
- Textise Home Page (full version | text only version)
- Textise Options Page (choose font size, font colour, etc.)

Are you a webmaster? Find out how to easily add Textise to your web site.

[Image: This is a featured article. Click here for more information.]  
[Image: Page semi-protected]  
Manhattan Project
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation Jump to search
This article is about the atomic bomb project. For other uses, see Manhattan Project (disambiguation).


Manhattan District[Image: A fiery mushroom cloud lights up the sky.]  
The Trinity test of the Manhattan Project was the first detonation of a nuclear weapon.
Active1942–1946Disbanded15 August 1947Country

      United States
      United Kingdom
      Canada

BranchU.S. Army Corps of Engineers Garrison/HQOak Ridge, Tennessee, U.S.Anniversaries13 August 1942Engagements

    Allied invasion of Italy
    Allied invasion of France
    Allied invasion of Germany
    Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki
    Allied occupation of Japan

CommandersNotable
commanders

    James C. Marshall
    Kenneth Nichols

InsigniaManhattan District shoulder sleeve insignia
[Image: Oval shaped shoulder patch with a deep blue background. At the top is a red circle and blue star, the patch of the Army Service Forces. It is surrounded by a white oval, representing a mushroom cloud. Below it is a white lightning bolt cracking a yellow circle, representing an atom.]  
Manhattan Project emblem (unofficial)
[Image: Circular shaped emblem with the words "Manhattan Project" at the top, and a large "A" in the center with the word "bomb" below it, surmounting the US Army Corps of Engineers' castle emblem]  
The Manhattan Project was a research and development undertaking during World War II that produced the first nuclear weapons. It was led by the United States with the support of the United Kingdom and Canada. From 1942 to 1946, the project was under the direction of Major General Leslie Groves of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Nuclear physicist Robert Oppenheimer was the director of the Los Alamos Laboratory that designed the actual bombs. The Army component of the project was designated the Manhattan District; Manhattan gradually superseded the official codename, Development of Substitute Materials, for the entire project. Along the way, the project absorbed its earlier British counterpart, Tube Alloys. The Manhattan Project began modestly in 1939, but grew to employ more than 130,000 people and cost nearly US$2 billion (about $23 billion in 2018 dollars). Over 90% of the cost was for building factories and to produce fissile material, with less than 10% for development and production of the weapons. Research and production took place at more than 30 sites across the United States, the United Kingdom, and Canada.

Two types of atomic bombs were developed concurrently during the war: a relatively simple gun-type fission weapon and a more complex implosion-type nuclear weapon. The Thin Man gun-type design proved impractical to use with plutonium, and therefore a simpler gun-type called Little Boy was developed that used uranium-235, an isotope that makes up only 0.7 percent of natural uranium. Chemically identical to the most common isotope, uranium-238, and with almost the same mass, it proved difficult to separate the two. Three methods were employed for uranium enrichment: electromagnetic, gaseous and thermal. Most of this work was performed at the Clinton Engineer Works at Oak Ridge, Tennessee.

In parallel with the work on uranium was an effort to produce plutonium, which was discovered at the University of California, Berkeley in 1940. After the feasibility of the world's first artificial nuclear reactor, the Chicago Pile-1, was demonstrated in 1942 at the Metallurgical Laboratory in the University of Chicago, the Project designed the X-10 Graphite Reactor at Oak Ridge and the production reactors at the Hanford Site in Washington state, in which uranium was irradiated and transmuted into plutonium. The plutonium was then chemically separated from the uranium, using the bismuth phosphate process. The Fat Man plutonium implosion-type weapon was developed in a concerted design and development effort by the Los Alamos Laboratory.

The project was also charged with gathering intelligence on the German nuclear weapon project. Through Operation Alsos, Manhattan Project personnel served in Europe, sometimes behind enemy lines, where they gathered nuclear materials and documents, and rounded up German scientists. Despite the Manhattan Project's tight security, Soviet atomic spies successfully penetrated the program.

The first nuclear device ever detonated was an implosion-type bomb at the Trinity test, conducted at New Mexico's Alamogordo Bombing and Gunnery Range on 16 July 1945. Little Boy and Fat Man bombs were used a month later in the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, respectively. In the immediate postwar years, the Manhattan Project conducted weapons testing at Bikini Atoll as part of Operation Crossroads, developed new weapons, promoted the development of the network of national laboratories, supported medical research into radiology and laid the foundations for the nuclear navy. It maintained control over American atomic weapons research and production until the formation of the United States Atomic Energy Commission in January 1947.

Contents 

    1  Origins and timeline 
    2  Feasibility 
        2.1  Proposals 
        2.2  Bomb design concepts 
    3  Organization 
        3.1  Manhattan District 
        3.2  Military Policy Committee 
        3.3  Collaboration with the United Kingdom 
    4  Project sites 
        4.1  Oak Ridge 
        4.2  Los Alamos 
        4.3  Chicago 
        4.4  Hanford 
        4.5  Canadian sites 
            4.5.1  British Columbia 
            4.5.2  Ontario 
            4.5.3  Northwest Territories 
        4.6  Heavy water sites 
    5  Uranium 
        5.1  Ore 
        5.2  Isotope separation 
            5.2.1  Centrifuges 
            5.2.2  Electromagnetic separation 
            5.2.3  Gaseous diffusion 
            5.2.4  Thermal diffusion 
        5.3  Aggregate U-235 production 
    6  Plutonium 
        6.1  X-10 Graphite Reactor 
        6.2  Hanford reactors 
        6.3  Separation process 
        6.4  Weapon design 
        6.5  Trinity 
    7  Personnel 
    8  Secrecy 
        8.1  Censorship 
        8.2  Soviet spies 
    9  Foreign intelligence 
    10  Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki 
        10.1  Preparations 
        10.2  Bombings 
    11  After the war 
    12  Cost 
    13  Legacy 
    14  Notes 
    15  References 
        15.1  General, administrative, and diplomatic histories 
        15.2  Technical histories 
        15.3  Participant accounts 
    16  External links 

Origins and timeline 
See also: Timeline of the Manhattan Project
The discovery of nuclear fission by German chemists Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann in 1938, and its theoretical explanation by Lise Meitner and Otto Frisch, made the development of an atomic bomb a theoretical possibility. There were fears that a German atomic bomb project would develop one first, especially among scientists who were refugees from Nazi Germany and other fascist countries.[1] In August 1939, Hungarian-born physicists Leó Szilárd and Eugene Wigner drafted the Einstein–Szilárd letter, which warned of the potential development of "extremely powerful bombs of a new type". It urged the United States to take steps to acquire stockpiles of uranium ore and accelerate the research of Enrico Fermi and others into nuclear chain reactions. They had it signed by Albert Einstein and delivered to President Franklin D. Roosevelt. Roosevelt called on Lyman Briggs of the National Bureau of Standards to head the Advisory Committee on Uranium to investigate the issues raised by the letter. Briggs held a meeting on 21 October 1939, which was attended by Szilárd, Wigner and Edward Teller. The committee reported back to Roosevelt in November that uranium "would provide a possible source of bombs with a destructiveness vastly greater than anything now known."[2]

The U.S. Navy awarded Columbia University $6,000 in funding, most of which Enrico Fermi and Szilard spent of purchasing graphite for chain reaction . A team of Columbia professors including Fermi, Szilard, Eugene T. Booth and John Dunning created the first nuclear fission reaction in the Americas, verifyiog the work of Hahn and Strassmann. The same team subsequently built a series of prototype nuclear reactors ("piles" as Fermi called it) in Pupin Hall at Columbia, but were not yet able to achieve a chain reaction.[3] The Advisory Committee on Uranium became the National Defense Research Committee (NDRC) on Uranium when that organization was formed on 27 June 1940.[4] Briggs proposed spending $167,000 on research into uranium, particularly the uranium-235 isotope, and plutonium, which was discovered in 1940 at the University of California, Berkeley.[5] On 28 June 1941, Roosevelt signed Executive Order 8807, which created the Office of Scientific Research and Development (OSRD),[6] with Vannevar Bush as its director. The office was empowered to engage in large engineering projects in addition to research.[5] The NDRC Committee on Uranium became the S-1 Section of the OSRD; the word "uranium" was dropped for security reasons.[7]

In Britain, Frisch and Rudolf Peierls at the University of Birmingham had made a breakthrough investigating the critical mass of uranium-235 in June 1939.[8] Their calculations indicated that it was within an order of magnitude of 10 kilograms (22 lb), which was small enough to be carried by a bomber of the day.[9] Their March 1940 Frisch–Peierls memorandum initiated the British atomic bomb project and its MAUD Committee,[10] which unanimously recommended pursuing the development of an atomic bomb.[9] In July 1940, Britain had offered to give the United States access to its scientific research,[11] and the Tizard Mission's John Cockcroft briefed American scientists on British developments. He discovered that the American project was smaller than the British, and not as far advanced.[12] As part of the scientific exchange, the MAUD Committee's findings were conveyed to the United States. One of its members, the Australian physicist Mark Oliphant, flew to the United States in late August 1941 and discovered that data provided by the MAUD Committee had not reached key American physicists. Oliphant then set out to find out why the committee's findings were apparently being ignored. He met with the Uranium Committee and visited Berkeley, California, where he spoke persuasively to Ernest O. Lawrence. Lawrence was sufficiently impressed to commence his own research into uranium. He in turn spoke to James B. Conant, Arthur H. Compton and George B. Pegram. Oliphant's mission was therefore a success; key American physicists were now aware of the potential power of an atomic bomb.[13][14]

On 9 October 1941, President Roosevelt approved the atomic program after he convened a meeting with Vannevar Bush and Vice President Henry A. Wallace. To control the program, he created a Top Policy Group consisting of himself—although he never attended a meeting—Wallace, Bush, Conant, Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson, and the Chief of Staff of the Army, General George C. Marshall. Roosevelt chose the Army to run the project rather than the Navy, because the Army had more experience with management of large-scale construction projects. He also agreed to coordinate the effort with that of the British, and on 11 October he sent a message to Prime Minister Winston Churchill, suggesting that they correspond on atomic matters.[15]

Feasibility  Proposals 
[Image: Six men in suits sitting on chairs, smiling and laughing]  
A 1940 meeting at Berkeley, California: Ernest O. Lawrence, Arthur H. Compton, Vannevar Bush, James B. Conant, Karl T. Compton, and Alfred L. Loomis
The S-1 Committee held its meeting on 18 December 1941 "pervaded by an atmosphere of enthusiasm and urgency"[16] in the wake of the attack on Pearl Harbor and the subsequent United States declaration of war upon Japan and then on Germany.[17] Work was proceeding on three different techniques for isotope separation to separate uranium-235 from the more abundant uranium-238. Lawrence and his team at the University of California, Berkeley, investigated electromagnetic separation, while Eger Murphree and Jesse Wakefield Beams's team looked into gaseous diffusion at Columbia University, and Philip Abelson directed research into thermal diffusion at the Carnegie Institution of Washington and later the Naval Research Laboratory.[18] Murphree was also the head of an unsuccessful separation project using gas centrifuges.[19]

Meanwhile, there were two lines of research into nuclear reactor technology, with Harold Urey continuing research into heavy water at Columbia, while Arthur Compton brought the scientists working under his supervision from Columbia, California and Princeton University to join his team at the University of Chicago, where he organized the Metallurgical Laboratory in early 1942 to study plutonium and reactors using graphite as a neutron moderator.[20] Briggs, Compton, Lawrence, Murphree, and Urey met on 23 May 1942 to finalize the S-1 Committee recommendations, which called for all five technologies to be pursued. This was approved by Bush, Conant, and Brigadier General Wilhelm D. Styer, the chief of staff of Major General Brehon B. Somervell's Services of Supply, who had been designated the Army's representative on nuclear matters.[18] Bush and Conant then took the recommendation to the Top Policy Group with a budget proposal for $54 million for construction by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, $31 million for research and development by OSRD and $5 million for contingencies in fiscal year 1943. The Top Policy Group in turn sent it to the President on 17 June 1942 and he approved it by writing "OK FDR" on the document.[18]

Bomb design concepts 
[Image: A series of doodles]  
Different fission bomb assembly methods explored during the July 1942 conference
Compton asked theoretical physicist J. Robert Oppenheimer of the University of California, Berkeley, to take over research into fast neutron calculations—the key to calculations of critical mass and weapon detonation—from Gregory Breit, who had quit on 18 May 1942 because of concerns over lax operational security.[21] John H. Manley, a physicist at the Metallurgical Laboratory, was assigned to assist Oppenheimer by contacting and coordinating experimental physics groups scattered across the country.[22] Oppenheimer and Robert Serber of the University of Illinois examined the problems of neutron diffusion—how neutrons moved in a nuclear chain reaction—and hydrodynamics—how the explosion produced by a chain reaction might behave. To review this work and the general theory of fission reactions, Oppenheimer and Fermi convened meetings at the University of Chicago in June and at the University of California, Berkeley, in July 1942 with theoretical physicists Hans Bethe, John Van Vleck, Edward Teller, Emil Konopinski, Robert Serber, Stan Frankel, and Eldred C. Nelson, the latter three former students of Oppenheimer, and experimental physicists Emilio Segrè, Felix Bloch, Franco Rasetti, John Henry Manley, and Edwin McMillan. They tentatively confirmed that a fission bomb was theoretically possible.[23]

There were still many unknown factors. The properties of pure uranium-235 were relatively unknown, as were those of plutonium, an element that had only been discovered in February 1941 by Glenn Seaborg and his team. The scientists at the (July 1942) Berkeley conference envisioned creating plutonium in nuclear reactors where uranium-238 atoms absorbed neutrons that had been emitted from fissioning uranium-235 atoms. At this point no reactor had been built, and only tiny quantities of plutonium were available from cyclotrons.[24] Even by December 1943, only two milligrams had been produced.[25] There were many ways of arranging the fissile material into a critical mass. The simplest was shooting a "cylindrical plug" into a sphere of "active material" with a "tamper"—dense material that would focus neutrons inward and keep the reacting mass together to increase its efficiency.[26] They also explored designs involving spheroids, a primitive form of "implosion" suggested by Richard C. Tolman, and the possibility of autocatalytic methods, which would increase the efficiency of the bomb as it exploded.[27]

Considering the idea of the fission bomb theoretically settled—at least until more experimental data was available—the 1942 Berkeley conference then turned in a different direction. Edward Teller pushed for discussion of a more powerful bomb: the "super", now usually referred to as a "hydrogen bomb", which would use the explosive force of a detonating fission bomb to ignite a nuclear fusion reaction in deuterium and tritium.[28] Teller proposed scheme after scheme, but Bethe refused each one. The fusion idea was put aside to concentrate on producing fission bombs.[29] Teller also raised the speculative possibility that an atomic bomb might "ignite" the atmosphere because of a hypothetical fusion reaction of nitrogen nuclei.[note 1] Bethe calculated that it could not happen,[31] and a report co-authored by Teller showed that "no self-propagating chain of nuclear reactions is likely to be started."[32] In Serber's account, Oppenheimer mentioned the possibility of this scenario to Arthur Compton, who "didn't have enough sense to shut up about it. It somehow got into a document that went to Washington" and was "never laid to rest".[note 2]

Organization  Manhattan District 
The Chief of Engineers, Major General Eugene Reybold, selected Colonel James C. Marshall to head the Army's part of the project in June 1942. Marshall created a liaison office in Washington, D.C., but established his temporary headquarters on the 18th floor of 270 Broadway in New York, where he could draw on administrative support from the Corps of Engineers' North Atlantic Division. It was close to the Manhattan office of Stone & Webster, the principal project contractor, and to Columbia University. He had permission to draw on his former command, the Syracuse District, for staff, and he started with Lieutenant Colonel Kenneth Nichols, who became his deputy.[34][35]

[Image: Organization chart of the project, showing project headquarters divisions at the top, Manhattan District in the middle, and field offices at the bottom]  
Manhattan Project Organization Chart, 1 May 1946
Because most of his task involved construction, Marshall worked in cooperation with the head of the Corps of Engineers Construction Division, Major General Thomas M. Robbins, and his deputy, Colonel Leslie Groves. Reybold, Somervell, and Styer decided to call the project "Development of Substitute Materials", but Groves felt that this would draw attention. Since engineer districts normally carried the name of the city where they were located, Marshall and Groves agreed to name the Army's component of the project the Manhattan District. This became official on 13 August, when Reybold issued the order creating the new district. Informally, it was known as the Manhattan Engineer District, or MED. Unlike other districts, it had no geographic boundaries, and Marshall had the authority of a division engineer. Development of Substitute Materials remained as the official codename of the project as a whole, but was supplanted over time by "Manhattan".[35]

Marshall later conceded that, "I had never heard of atomic fission but I did know that you could not build much of a plant, much less four of them for $90 million."[36] A single TNT plant that Nichols had recently built in Pennsylvania had cost $128 million.[37] Nor were they impressed with estimates to the nearest order of magnitude, which Groves compared with telling a caterer to prepare for between ten and a thousand guests.[38] A survey team from Stone & Webster had already scouted a site for the production plants. The War Production Board recommended sites around Knoxville, Tennessee, an isolated area where the Tennessee Valley Authority could supply ample electric power and the rivers could provide cooling water for the reactors. After examining several sites, the survey team selected one near Elza, Tennessee. Conant advised that it be acquired at once and Styer agreed but Marshall temporized, awaiting the results of Conant's reactor experiments before taking action.[39] Of the prospective processes, only Lawrence's electromagnetic separation appeared sufficiently advanced for construction to commence.[40]

Marshall and Nichols began assembling the resources they would need. The first step was to obtain a high priority rating for the project. The top ratings were AA-1 through AA-4 in descending order, although there was also a special AAA rating reserved for emergencies. Ratings AA-1 and AA-2 were for essential weapons and equipment, so Colonel Lucius D. Clay, the deputy chief of staff at Services and Supply for requirements and resources, felt that the highest rating he could assign was AA-3, although he was willing to provide a AAA rating on request for critical materials if the need arose.[41] Nichols and Marshall were disappointed; AA-3 was the same priority as Nichols' TNT plant in Pennsylvania.[42]

Military Policy Committee 
[Image: A man smiling in a suit in suit and one in a uniform chat around a pile of twisted metal.]  
Oppenheimer and Groves at the remains of the Trinity test in September 1945, two months after the test blast and just after the end of World War II. The white overshoes prevented fallout from sticking to the soles of their shoes.[43]
Vannevar Bush became dissatisfied with Colonel Marshall's failure to get the project moving forward expeditiously, specifically the failure to acquire the Tennessee site, the low priority allocated to the project by the Army and the location of his headquarters in New York City.[44] Bush felt that more aggressive leadership was required, and spoke to Harvey Bundy and Generals Marshall, Somervell, and Styer about his concerns. He wanted the project placed under a senior policy committee, with a prestigious officer, preferably Styer, as overall director.[42]

Somervell and Styer selected Groves for the post, informing him on 17 September of this decision, and that General Marshall ordered that he be promoted to brigadier general,[45] as it was felt that the title "general" would hold more sway with the academic scientists working on the Manhattan Project.[46] Groves' orders placed him directly under Somervell rather than Reybold, with Colonel Marshall now answerable to Groves.[47] Groves established his headquarters in Washington, D.C., on the fifth floor of the New War Department Building, where Colonel Marshall had his liaison office.[48] He assumed command of the Manhattan Project on 23 September. Later that day, he attended a meeting called by Stimson, which established a Military Policy Committee, responsible to the Top Policy Group, consisting of Bush (with Conant as an alternate), Styer and Rear Admiral William R. Purnell.[45] Tolman and Conant were later appointed as Groves' scientific advisers.[49]

On 19 September, Groves went to Donald Nelson, the chairman of the War Production Board, and asked for broad authority to issue a AAA rating whenever it was required. Nelson initially balked but quickly caved in when Groves threatened to go to the President.[50] Groves promised not to use the AAA rating unless it was necessary. It soon transpired that for the routine requirements of the project the AAA rating was too high but the AA-3 rating was too low. After a long campaign, Groves finally received AA-1 authority on 1 July 1944.[51] According to Groves, "In Washington you became aware of the importance of top priority. Most everything proposed in the Roosevelt administration would have top priority. That would last for about a week or two and then something else would get top priority".[52]

One of Groves' early problems was to find a director for Project Y, the group that would design and build the bomb. The obvious choice was one of the three laboratory heads, Urey, Lawrence, or Compton, but they could not be spared. Compton recommended Oppenheimer, who was already intimately familiar with the bomb design concepts. However, Oppenheimer had little administrative experience, and, unlike Urey, Lawrence, and Compton, had not won a Nobel Prize, which many scientists felt that the head of such an important laboratory should have. There were also concerns about Oppenheimer's security status, as many of his associates were Communists, including his brother, Frank Oppenheimer; his wife, Kitty; and his girlfriend, Jean Tatlock. A long conversation on a train in October 1942 convinced Groves and Nichols that Oppenheimer thoroughly understood the issues involved in setting up a laboratory in a remote area and should be appointed as its director. Groves personally waived the security requirements and issued Oppenheimer a clearance on 20 July 1943.[53][54]

Collaboration with the United Kingdom 
Main article: British contribution to the Manhattan Project
The British and Americans exchanged nuclear information but did not initially combine their efforts. Britain rebuffed attempts by Bush and Conant in 1941 to strengthen cooperation with its own project, codenamed Tube Alloys, because it was reluctant to share its technological lead and help the United States develop its own atomic bomb.[55] An American scientist who brought a personal letter from Roosevelt to Churchill offering to pay for all research and development in an Anglo-American project was poorly treated, and Churchill did not reply to the letter. The United States as a result decided as early as April 1942 that if its offer was rejected, they should proceed alone.[56] The British, who had made significant contributions early in the war, did not have the resources to carry through such a research program while fighting for their survival. As a result, Tube Alloys soon fell behind its American counterpart.[57] and on 30 July 1942, Sir John Anderson, the minister responsible for Tube Alloys, advised Churchill that: "We must face the fact that ... [our] pioneering work ... is a dwindling asset and that, unless we capitalise it quickly, we shall be outstripped. We now have a real contribution to make to a 'merger.' Soon we shall have little or none."[58] That month Churchill and Roosevelt made an informal, unwritten agreement for atomic collaboration.[59]

[Image: A large man in uniform and a bespectacled thin man in a suit and tie sit at a desk.]  
Groves confers with James Chadwick, the head of the British Mission.
The opportunity for an equal partnership no longer existed, however, as shown in August 1942 when the British unsuccessfully demanded substantial control over the project while paying none of the costs. By 1943 the roles of the two countries had reversed from late 1941;[56] in January Conant notified the British that they would no longer receive atomic information except in certain areas. While the British were shocked by the abrogation of the Churchill-Roosevelt agreement, head of the Canadian National Research Council C. J. Mackenzie was less surprised, writing "I can't help feeling that the United Kingdom group [over] emphasizes the importance of their contribution as compared with the Americans."[59] As Conant and Bush told the British, the order came "from the top".[60]

The British bargaining position had worsened; the American scientists had decided that the United States no longer needed outside help, and they wanted to prevent Britain exploiting post-war commercial applications of atomic energy. The committee supported, and Roosevelt agreed to, restricting the flow of information to what Britain could use during the war—especially not bomb design—even if doing so slowed down the American project. By early 1943 the British stopped sending research and scientists to America, and as a result the Americans stopped all information sharing. The British considered ending the supply of Canadian uranium and heavy water to force the Americans to again share, but Canada needed American supplies to produce them.[61] They investigated the possibility of an independent nuclear program, but determined that it could not be ready in time to affect the outcome of the war in Europe.[62]

By March 1943 Conant decided that British help would benefit some areas of the project. James Chadwick and one or two other British scientists were important enough that the bomb design team at Los Alamos needed them, despite the risk of revealing weapon design secrets.[63] In August 1943 Churchill and Roosevelt negotiated the Quebec Agreement, which resulted in a resumption of cooperation[64] between scientists working on the same problem. Britain, however, agreed to restrictions on data on the building of large-scale production plants necessary for the bomb.[65] The subsequent Hyde Park Agreement in September 1944 extended this cooperation to the postwar period.[66] The Quebec Agreement established the Combined Policy Committee to coordinate the efforts of the United States, United Kingdom and Canada. Stimson, Bush and Conant served as the American members of the Combined Policy Committee, Field Marshal Sir John Dill and Colonel J. J. Llewellin were the British members, and C. D. Howe was the Canadian member.[67] Llewellin returned to the United Kingdom at the end of 1943 and was replaced on the committee by Sir Ronald Ian Campbell, who in turn was replaced by the British Ambassador to the United States, Lord Halifax, in early 1945. Sir John Dill died in Washington, D.C., in November 1944 and was replaced both as Chief of the British Joint Staff Mission and as a member of the Combined Policy Committee by Field Marshal Sir Henry Maitland Wilson.[68]

When cooperation resumed after the Quebec agreement, the Americans' progress and expenditures amazed the British. The United States had already spent more than $1 billion ($11,800,000,000 today), while in 1943, the United Kingdom had spent about £0.5 million. Chadwick thus pressed for British involvement in the Manhattan Project to the fullest extent and abandon any hopes of a British project during the war.[62] With Churchill's backing, he attempted to ensure that every request from Groves for assistance was honored.[69] The British Mission that arrived in the United States in December 1943 included Niels Bohr, Otto Frisch, Klaus Fuchs, Rudolf Peierls, and Ernest Titterton.[70] More scientists arrived in early 1944. While those assigned to gaseous diffusion left by the fall of 1944, the 35 working with Lawrence at Berkeley were assigned to existing laboratory groups and stayed until the end of the war. The 19 sent to Los Alamos also joined existing groups, primarily related to implosion and bomb assembly, but not the plutonium-related ones.[62] Part of the Quebec Agreement specified that nuclear weapons would not be used against another country without mutual consent. In June 1945, Wilson agreed that the use of nuclear weapons against Japan would be recorded as a decision of the Combined Policy Committee.[71]

The Combined Policy Committee created the Combined Development Trust in June 1944, with Groves as its chairman, to procure uranium and thorium ores on international markets. The Belgian Congo and Canada held much of the world's uranium outside Eastern Europe, and the Belgian government in exile was in London. Britain agreed to give the United States most of the Belgian ore, as it could not use most of the supply without restricted American research.[72] In 1944, the Trust purchased 3,440,000 pounds (1,560,000 kg) of uranium oxide ore from companies operating mines in the Belgian Congo. In order to avoid briefing US Secretary of the Treasury Henry Morgenthau Jr. on the project, a special account not subject to the usual auditing and controls was used to hold Trust monies. Between 1944 and the time he resigned from the Trust in 1947, Groves deposited a total of $37.5 million into the Trust's account.[73]

Groves appreciated the early British atomic research and the British scientists' contributions to the Manhattan Project, but stated that the United States would have succeeded without them.[62] He also said that Churchill was "the best friend the atomic bomb project had [as] he kept Roosevelt's interest up ... He just stirred him up all the time by telling him how important he thought the project was."[52]

The British wartime participation was crucial to the success of the United Kingdom's independent nuclear weapons program after the war when the McMahon Act of 1946 temporarily ended American nuclear cooperation.[62]

Project sites 
[Image: Map of the United States and southern Canada with major project sites marked]  
A selection of US and Canadian sites important to the Manhattan Project. Click on the location for more information.
Oak Ridge 
Main article: Clinton Engineer Works
[Image: Workers, mostly women, pour out of a cluster of buildings. A billboard exhorts them to "Make C.E.W. COUNT continue to protect project information!"]  
Shift change at the Y-12 uranium enrichment facility at the Clinton Engineer Works in Oak Ridge, Tennessee, on 11 August 1945. By May 1945, 82,000 people were employed at the Clinton Engineer Works.[74] Photograph by the Manhattan District photographer Ed Westcott.
The day after he took over the project, Groves took a train to Tennessee with Colonel Marshall to inspect the proposed site there, and Groves was impressed.[75][76] On 29 September 1942, United States Under Secretary of War Robert P. Patterson authorized the Corps of Engineers to acquire 56,000 acres (23,000 ha) of land by eminent domain at a cost of $3.5 million. An additional 3,000 acres (1,200 ha) was subsequently acquired. About 1,000 families were affected by the condemnation order, which came into effect on 7 October.[77] Protests, legal appeals, and a 1943 Congressional inquiry were to no avail.[78] By mid-November U.S. Marshals were tacking notices to vacate on farmhouse doors, and construction contractors were moving in.[79] Some families were given two weeks' notice to vacate farms that had been their homes for generations;[80] others had settled there after being evicted to make way for the Great Smoky Mountains National Park in the 1920s or the Norris Dam in the 1930s.[78] The ultimate cost of land acquisition in the area, which was not completed until March 1945, was only about $2.6 million, which worked out to around $47 an acre.[81] When presented with Public Proclamation Number Two, which declared Oak Ridge a total exclusion area that no one could enter without military permission, the Governor of Tennessee, Prentice Cooper, angrily tore it up.[82]

Initially known as the Kingston Demolition Range, the site was officially renamed the Clinton Engineer Works (CEW) in early 1943.[83] While Stone & Webster concentrated on the production facilities, the architectural and engineering firm Skidmore, Owings & Merrill designed and built a residential community for 13,000. The community was located on the slopes of Black Oak Ridge, from which the new town of Oak Ridge got its name.[84] The Army presence at Oak Ridge increased in August 1943 when Nichols replaced Marshall as head of the Manhattan Engineer District. One of his first tasks was to move the district headquarters to Oak Ridge although the name of the district did not change.[85] In September 1943 the administration of community facilities was outsourced to Turner Construction Company through a subsidiary, the Roane-Anderson Company (for Roane and Anderson Counties, in which Oak Ridge was located).[86] Chemical engineers, including William J. Wilcox Jr. and Warren Fuchs, were part of "frantic efforts" to make 10% to 12% enriched uranium 235, known as the code name "tuballoy tetroxide", with tight security and fast approvals for supplies and materials.[87] The population of Oak Ridge soon expanded well beyond the initial plans, and peaked at 75,000 in May 1945, by which time 82,000 people were employed at the Clinton Engineer Works,[74] and 10,000 by Roane-Anderson.[86]

Fine-arts photographer, Josephine Herrick, and her colleague, Mary Steers, helped document the work at Oak Ridge.[88]

Los Alamos 
Main article: Project Y
Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Los Alamos Ranch School Seizure Letter
The idea of locating Project Y at Oak Ridge was considered, but in the end it was decided that it should be in a remote location. On Oppenheimer's recommendation, the search for a suitable site was narrowed to the vicinity of Albuquerque, New Mexico, where Oppenheimer owned a ranch. In October 1942, Major John H. Dudley of the Manhattan Project was sent to survey the area, and he recommended a site near Jemez Springs, New Mexico.[89] On 16 November, Oppenheimer, Groves, Dudley and others toured the site. Oppenheimer feared that the high cliffs surrounding the site would make his people feel claustrophobic, while the engineers were concerned with the possibility of flooding. The party then moved on to the vicinity of the Los Alamos Ranch School. Oppenheimer was impressed and expressed a strong preference for the site, citing its natural beauty and views of the Sangre de Cristo Mountains, which, it was hoped, would inspire those who would work on the project.[90][91] The engineers were concerned about the poor access road, and whether the water supply would be adequate, but otherwise felt that it was ideal.[92]

[Image: A group of men in shirtsleeves sitting on folding chairs]  
Physicists at a Manhattan District-sponsored colloquium at the Los Alamos Laboratory on the Super in April 1946. In the front row are Norris Bradbury, John Manley, Enrico Fermi and J. M. B. Kellogg. Robert Oppenheimer, in dark coat, is behind Manley; to Oppenheimer's left is Richard Feynman. The Army officer on the left is Colonel Oliver Haywood.
Patterson approved the acquisition of the site on 25 November 1942, authorizing $440,000 for the purchase of the site of 54,000 acres (22,000 ha), all but 8,900 acres (3,600 ha) of which were already owned by the Federal Government.[93] Secretary of Agriculture Claude R. Wickard granted use of some 45,100 acres (18,300 ha) of United States Forest Service land to the War Department "for so long as the military necessity continues".[94] The need for land, for a new road, and later for a right of way for a 25-mile (40 km) power line, eventually brought wartime land purchases to 45,737 acres (18,509.1 ha), but only $414,971 was spent.[93] Construction was contracted to the M. M. Sundt Company of Tucson, Arizona, with Willard C. Kruger and Associates of Santa Fe, New Mexico, as architect and engineer. Work commenced in December 1942. Groves initially allocated $300,000 for construction, three times Oppenheimer's estimate, with a planned completion date of 15 March 1943. It soon became clear that the scope of Project Y was greater than expected, and by the time Sundt finished on 30 November 1943, over $7 million had been spent.[95]

Map of Los Alamos site, New Mexico, 1943–45
Because it was secret, Los Alamos was referred to as "Site Y" or "the Hill".[96] Birth certificates of babies born in Los Alamos during the war listed their place of birth as PO Box 1663 in Santa Fe.[97] Initially Los Alamos was to have been a military laboratory with Oppenheimer and other researchers commissioned into the Army. Oppenheimer went so far as to order himself a lieutenant colonel's uniform, but two key physicists, Robert Bacher and Isidor Rabi, balked at the idea. Conant, Groves and Oppenheimer then devised a compromise whereby the laboratory was operated by the University of California under contract to the War Department.[98]

Chicago 
Main article: Metallurgical Laboratory
An Army-OSRD council on 25 June 1942 decided to build a pilot plant for plutonium production in Red Gate Woods southwest of Chicago. In July, Nichols arranged for a lease of 1,025 acres (415 ha) from the Cook County Forest Preserve District, and Captain James F. Grafton was appointed Chicago area engineer. It soon became apparent that the scale of operations was too great for the area, and it was decided to build the plant at Oak Ridge, and keep a research and testing facility in Chicago.[99][100]

Delays in establishing the plant in Red Gate Woods led Compton to authorize the Metallurgical Laboratory to construct the first nuclear reactor beneath the bleachers of Stagg Field at the University of Chicago. The reactor required an enormous amount of graphite blocks and uranium pellets. At the time, there was a limited source of pure uranium. Frank Spedding of Iowa State University were able to produce only two short tons of pure uranium. Additional three short tons of uranium metal was supplied by Westinghouse Lamp Plant which was produced in a rush with makeshift process. A large square balloon was constructed by Goodyear Tire to encase the reactor.[101][102] On 2 December 1942, a team led by Enrico Fermi initiated the first artificial[note 3] self-sustaining nuclear chain reaction in an experimental reactor known as Chicago Pile-1.[104] The point at which a reaction becomes self-sustaining became known as "going critical". Compton reported the success to Conant in Washington, D.C., by a coded phone call, saying, "The Italian navigator [Fermi] has just landed in the new world."[105][note 4]

In January 1943, Grafton's successor, Major Arthur V. Peterson, ordered Chicago Pile-1 dismantled and reassembled at Red Gate Woods, as he regarded the operation of a reactor as too hazardous for a densely populated area.[106] At the Argonne site, Chicago Pile-3, the first heavy water reactor, went critical on 15 May 1944.[107][108] After the war, the operations that remained at Red Gate moved to the new site of the Argonne National Laboratory about 6 miles (9.7 km) away.[100]

Hanford 
Main article: Hanford Site
By December 1942 there were concerns that even Oak Ridge was too close to a major population center (Knoxville) in the unlikely event of a major nuclear accident. Groves recruited DuPont in November 1942 to be the prime contractor for the construction of the plutonium production complex. DuPont was offered a standard cost plus fixed-fee contract, but the President of the company, Walter S. Carpenter, Jr., wanted no profit of any kind, and asked for the proposed contract to be amended to explicitly exclude the company from acquiring any patent rights. This was accepted, but for legal reasons a nominal fee of one dollar was agreed upon. After the war, DuPont asked to be released from the contract early, and had to return 33 cents.[109]

[Image: A large crowd of sullen looking workmen at a counter where two women are writing. Some of the workmen are wearing identify photographs of themselves on their hats.]  
Hanford workers collect their paychecks at the Western Union office.
DuPont recommended that the site be located far from the existing uranium production facility at Oak Ridge.[110] In December 1942, Groves dispatched Colonel Franklin Matthias and DuPont engineers to scout potential sites. Matthias reported that Hanford Site near Richland, Washington, was "ideal in virtually all respects". It was isolated and near the Columbia River, which could supply sufficient water to cool the reactors that would produce the plutonium. Groves visited the site in January and established the Hanford Engineer Works (HEW), codenamed "Site W".[111]

Under Secretary Patterson gave his approval on 9 February, allocating $5 million for the acquisition of 40,000 acres (16,000 ha) of land in the area. The federal government relocated some 1,500 residents of White Bluffs and Hanford, and nearby settlements, as well as the Wanapum and other tribes using the area. A dispute arose with farmers over compensation for crops, which had already been planted before the land was acquired. Where schedules allowed, the Army allowed the crops to be harvested, but this was not always possible.[111] The land acquisition process dragged on and was not completed before the end of the Manhattan Project in December 1946.[112]

The dispute did not delay work. Although progress on the reactor design at Metallurgical Laboratory and DuPont was not sufficiently advanced to accurately predict the scope of the project, a start was made in April 1943 on facilities for an estimated 25,000 workers, half of whom were expected to live on-site. By July 1944, some 1,200 buildings had been erected and nearly 51,000 people were living in the construction camp. As area engineer, Matthias exercised overall control of the site.[113] At its peak, the construction camp was the third most populous town in Washington state.[114] Hanford operated a fleet of over 900 buses, more than the city of Chicago.[115] Like Los Alamos and Oak Ridge, Richland was a gated community with restricted access, but it looked more like a typical wartime American boomtown: the military profile was lower, and physical security elements like high fences, towers, and guard dogs were less evident.[116]

Canadian sites 
Main article: Montreal Laboratory
British Columbia 
Cominco had produced electrolytic hydrogen at Trail, British Columbia, since 1930. Urey suggested in 1941 that it could produce heavy water. To the existing $10 million plant consisting of 3,215 cells consuming 75 MW of hydroelectric power, secondary electrolysis cells were added to increase the deuterium concentration in the water from 2.3% to 99.8%. For this process, Hugh Taylor of Princeton developed a platinum-on-carbon catalyst for the first three stages while Urey developed a nickel-chromia one for the fourth stage tower. The final cost was $2.8 million. The Canadian Government did not officially learn of the project until August 1942. Trail's heavy water production started in January 1944 and continued until 1956. Heavy water from Trail was used for Chicago Pile 3, the first reactor using heavy water and natural uranium, which went critical on 15 May 1944.[117]

Ontario 
The Chalk River, Ontario, site was established to rehouse the Allied effort at the Montreal Laboratory away from an urban area. A new community was built at Deep River, Ontario, to provide residences and facilities for the team members. The site was chosen for its proximity to the industrial manufacturing area of Ontario and Quebec, and proximity to a rail head adjacent to a large military base, Camp Petawawa. Located on the Ottawa River, it had access to abundant water. The first director of the new laboratory was Hans von Halban. He was replaced by John Cockcroft in May 1944, who in turn was succeeded by Bennett Lewis in September 1946. A pilot reactor known as ZEEP (zero-energy experimental pile) became the first Canadian reactor, and the first to be completed outside the United States, when it went critical in September 1945, ZEEP remained in use by researchers until 1970.[118] A larger 10 MW NRX reactor, which was designed during the war, was completed and went critical in July 1947.[117]

Northwest Territories 
The Eldorado Mine at Port Radium was a source of uranium ore.[119]

Heavy water sites 
Main article: P-9 Project
Although DuPont's preferred designs for the nuclear reactors were helium cooled and used graphite as a moderator, DuPont still expressed an interest in using heavy water as a backup, in case the graphite reactor design proved infeasible for some reason. For this purpose, it was estimated that 3 short tons (2.7 t) of heavy water would be required per month. The P-9 Project was the government's code name for the heavy water production program. As the plant at Trail, which was then under construction, could produce 0.5 short tons (0.45 t) per month, additional capacity was required. Groves therefore authorized DuPont to establish heavy water facilities at the Morgantown Ordnance Works, near Morgantown, West Virginia; at the Wabash River Ordnance Works, near Dana and Newport, Indiana; and at the Alabama Ordnance Works, near Childersburg and Sylacauga, Alabama. Although known as Ordnance Works and paid for under Ordnance Department contracts, they were built and operated by the Army Corps of Engineers. The American plants used a process different from Trail's; heavy water was extracted by distillation, taking advantage of the slightly higher boiling point of heavy water.[120][121]

Uranium  Ore 
The key raw material for the project was uranium, which was used as fuel for the reactors, as feed that was transformed into plutonium, and, in its enriched form, in the atomic bomb itself. There were four known major deposits of uranium in 1940: in Colorado, in northern Canada, in Joachimsthal in Czechoslovakia, and in the Belgian Congo.[122] All but Joachimstal were in allied hands. A November 1942 survey determined that sufficient quantities of uranium were available to satisfy the project's requirements.[123] Nichols arranged with the State Department for export controls to be placed on uranium oxide and negotiated for the purchase of 1,200 short tons (1,100 t) of uranium ore from the Belgian Congo that was being stored in a warehouse on Staten Island and the remaining stocks of mined ore stored in the Congo. He negotiated with Eldorado Gold Mines for the purchase of ore from its refinery in Port Hope, Ontario, and its shipment in 100-ton lots. The Canadian government subsequently bought up the company's stock until it acquired a controlling interest.[124]

While these purchases assured a sufficient supply to meet wartime needs, the American and British leaders concluded that it was in their countries' interest to gain control of as much of the world's uranium deposits as possible. The richest source of ore was the Shinkolobwe mine in the Belgian Congo, but it was flooded and closed. Nichols unsuccessfully attempted to negotiate its reopening and the sale of the entire future output to the United States with Edgar Sengier, the director of the company that owned the mine, Union Minière du Haut Katanga.[125] The matter was then taken up by the Combined Policy Committee. As 30 percent of Union Minière's stock was controlled by British interests, the British took the lead in negotiations. Sir John Anderson and Ambassador John Winant hammered out a deal with Sengier and the Belgian government in May 1944 for the mine to be reopened and 1,720 short tons (1,560 t) of ore to be purchased at $1.45 a pound.[126] To avoid dependence on the British and Canadians for ore, Groves also arranged for the purchase of US Vanadium Corporation's stockpile in Uravan, Colorado. Uranium mining in Colorado yielded about 800 short tons (730 t) of ore.[127]

Mallinckrodt Incorporated in St. Louis, Missouri, took the raw ore and dissolved it in nitric acid to produce uranyl nitrate. Ether was then added in a liquid–liquid extraction process to separate the impurities from the uranyl nitrate. This was then heated to form uranium trioxide, which was reduced to highly pure uranium dioxide.[128] By July 1942, Mallinckrodt was producing a ton of highly pure oxide a day, but turning this into uranium metal initially proved more difficult for contractors Westinghouse and Metal Hydrides.[129] Production was too slow and quality was unacceptably low. A special branch of the Metallurgical Laboratory was established at Iowa State College in Ames, Iowa, under Frank Spedding to investigate alternatives. This became known as the Ames Project, and its Ames process became available in 1943.[130]

    Uranium refining at Ames
    A "bomb" (pressure vessel) containing uranium halide and sacrificial metal, probably magnesium, being lowered into a furnace

    After the reaction, the interior of a bomb coated with remnant slag

    A uranium metal "biscuit" from the reduction reaction

Isotope separation 
Natural uranium consists of 99.3% uranium-238 and 0.7% uranium-235, but only the latter is fissile. The chemically identical uranium-235 has to be physically separated from the more plentiful isotope. Various methods were considered for uranium enrichment, most of which was carried out at Oak Ridge.[131]

The most obvious technology, the centrifuge, failed, but electromagnetic separation, gaseous diffusion, and thermal diffusion technologies were all successful and contributed to the project. In February 1943, Groves came up with the idea of using the output of some plants as the input for others.[132]

[Image: Contour map of the Oak Ridge area. There is a river to the south, while the township is in the north.]  
Oak Ridge hosted several uranium separation technologies. The Y-12 electromagnetic separation plant is in the upper right. The K-25 and K-27 gaseous diffusion plants are in the lower left, near the S-50 thermal diffusion plant. (The X-10 was for plutonium production.)
Centrifuges 
The centrifuge process was regarded as the only promising separation method in April 1942.[133] Jesse Beams had developed such a process at the University of Virginia during the 1930s, but had encountered technical difficulties. The process required high rotational speeds, but at certain speeds harmonic vibrations developed that threatened to tear the machinery apart. It was therefore necessary to accelerate quickly through these speeds. In 1941 he began working with uranium hexafluoride, the only known gaseous compound of uranium, and was able to separate uranium-235. At Columbia, Urey had Karl Cohen investigate the process, and he produced a body of mathematical theory making it possible to design a centrifugal separation unit, which Westinghouse undertook to construct.[134]

Scaling this up to a production plant presented a formidable technical challenge. Urey and Cohen estimated that producing a kilogram (2.2 lb) of uranium-235 per day would require up to 50,000 centrifuges with 1-meter (3 ft 3 in) rotors, or 10,000 centrifuges with 4-meter (13 ft) rotors, assuming that 4-meter rotors could be built. The prospect of keeping so many rotors operating continuously at high speed appeared daunting,[135] and when Beams ran his experimental apparatus, he obtained only 60% of the predicted yield, indicating that more centrifuges would be required. Beams, Urey and Cohen then began work on a series of improvements which promised to increase the efficiency of the process. However, frequent failures of motors, shafts and bearings at high speeds delayed work on the pilot plant.[136] In November 1942 the centrifuge process was abandoned by the Military Policy Committee following a recommendation by Conant, Nichols and August C. Klein of Stone & Webster.[137]

Electromagnetic separation 
Main article: Y-12 Project
Electromagnetic isotope separation was developed by Lawrence at the University of California Radiation Laboratory. This method employed devices known as calutrons, a hybrid of the standard laboratory mass spectrometer and the cyclotron magnet. The name was derived from the words California, university and cyclotron.[138] In the electromagnetic process, a magnetic field deflected charged particles according to mass.[139] The process was neither scientifically elegant nor industrially efficient.[140] Compared with a gaseous diffusion plant or a nuclear reactor, an electromagnetic separation plant would consume more scarce materials, require more manpower to operate, and cost more to build. Nonetheless, the process was approved because it was based on proven technology and therefore represented less risk. Moreover, it could be built in stages, and rapidly reach industrial capacity.[138]

[Image: A large oval-shaped structure]  
Alpha I racetrack at Y-12
Marshall and Nichols discovered that the electromagnetic isotope separation process would require 5,000 short tons (4,500 tonnes) of copper, which was in desperately short supply. However, silver could be substituted, in an 11:10 ratio. On 3 August 1942, Nichols met with Under Secretary of the Treasury Daniel W. Bell and asked for the transfer of 6,000 tons of silver bullion from the West Point Bullion Depository. "Young man," Bell told him, "you may think of silver in tons but the Treasury will always think of silver in troy ounces!"[141] Eventually, 14,700 short tons (13,300 tonnes; 430,000,000 troy ounces) were used.[142]

The 1,000-troy-ounce (31 kg) silver bars were cast into cylindrical billets and taken to Phelps Dodge in Bayway, New Jersey, where they were extruded into strips 0.625 inches (15.9 mm) thick, 3 inches (76 mm) wide and 40 feet (12 m) long. These were wound onto magnetic coils by Allis-Chalmers in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. After the war, all the machinery was dismantled and cleaned and the floorboards beneath the machinery were ripped up and burned to recover minute amounts of silver. In the end, only 1/3,600,000th was lost.[142][143] The last silver was returned in May 1970.[144]

Responsibility for the design and construction of the electromagnetic separation plant, which came to be called Y-12, was assigned to Stone & Webster by the S-1 Committee in June 1942. The design called for five first-stage processing units, known as Alpha racetracks, and two units for final processing, known as Beta racetracks. In September 1943 Groves authorized construction of four more racetracks, known as Alpha II. Construction began in February 1943.[145]

When the plant was started up for testing on schedule in October, the 14-ton vacuum tanks crept out of alignment because of the power of the magnets, and had to be fastened more securely. A more serious problem arose when the magnetic coils started shorting out. In December Groves ordered a magnet to be broken open, and handfuls of rust were found inside. Groves then ordered the racetracks to be torn down and the magnets sent back to the factory to be cleaned. A pickling plant was established on-site to clean the pipes and fittings.[140] The second Alpha I was not operational until the end of January 1944, the first Beta and first and third Alpha I's came online in March, and the fourth Alpha I was operational in April. The four Alpha II racetracks were completed between July and October 1944.[146]

[Image: A long corridor with many consoles with dials and switches, attended by women seated on high stools]  
Calutron Girls were young women who monitored calutron control panels at Y-12. Gladys Owens, seated in the foreground, was unaware of what she had been involved with until seeing this photo on a public tour of the facility 50 years later. Photo by Ed Westcott.[147]
Tennessee Eastman was contracted to manage Y-12 on the usual cost plus fixed-fee basis, with a fee of $22,500 per month plus $7,500 per racetrack for the first seven racetracks and $4,000 per additional racetrack.[148] The calutrons were initially operated by scientists from Berkeley to remove bugs and achieve a reasonable operating rate. They were then turned over to trained Tennessee Eastman operators who had only a high school education. Nichols compared unit production data, and pointed out to Lawrence that the young "hillbilly" girl operators were outperforming his PhDs. They agreed to a production race and Lawrence lost, a morale boost for the Tennessee Eastman workers and supervisors. The girls were "trained like soldiers not to reason why", while "the scientists could not refrain from time-consuming investigation of the cause of even minor fluctuations of the dials."[149]

Y-12 initially enriched the uranium-235 content to between 13% and 15%, and shipped the first few hundred grams of this to Los Alamos in March 1944. Only 1 part in 5,825 of the uranium feed emerged as final product. Much of the rest was splattered over equipment in the process. Strenuous recovery efforts helped raise production to 10% of the uranium-235 feed by January 1945. In February the Alpha racetracks began receiving slightly enriched (1.4%) feed from the new S-50 thermal diffusion plant. The next month it received enhanced (5%) feed from the K-25 gaseous diffusion plant. By August K-25 was producing uranium sufficiently enriched to feed directly into the Beta tracks.[150]

Gaseous diffusion 
Main article: K-25
The most promising but also the most challenging method of isotope separation was gaseous diffusion. Graham's law states that the rate of effusion of a gas is inversely proportional to the square root of its molecular mass, so in a box containing a semi-permeable membrane and a mixture of two gases, the lighter molecules will pass out of the container more rapidly than the heavier molecules. The gas leaving the container is somewhat enriched in the lighter molecules, while the residual gas is somewhat depleted. The idea was that such boxes could be formed into a cascade of pumps and membranes, with each successive stage containing a slightly more enriched mixture. Research into the process was carried out at Columbia University by a group that included Harold Urey, Karl P. Cohen, and John R. Dunning.[151]

[Image: Oblique aerial view of an enormous U-shaped building]  
Oak Ridge K-25 plant
In November 1942 the Military Policy Committee approved the construction of a 600-stage gaseous diffusion plant.[152] On 14 December, M. W. Kellogg accepted an offer to construct the plant, which was codenamed K-25. A cost plus fixed-fee contract was negotiated, eventually totaling $2.5 million. A separate corporate entity called Kellex was created for the project, headed by Percival C. Keith, one of Kellogg's vice presidents.[153] The process faced formidable technical difficulties. The highly corrosive gas uranium hexafluoride would have to be used, as no substitute could be found, and the motors and pumps would have to be vacuum tight and enclosed in inert gas. The biggest problem was the design of the barrier, which would have to be strong, porous and resistant to corrosion by uranium hexafluoride. The best choice for this seemed to be nickel. Edward Adler and Edward Norris created a mesh barrier from electroplated nickel. A six-stage pilot plant was built at Columbia to test the process, but the Norris-Adler prototype proved to be too brittle. A rival barrier was developed from powdered nickel by Kellex, the Bell Telephone Laboratories and the Bakelite Corporation. In January 1944, Groves ordered the Kellex barrier into production.[154][155]

Kellex's design for K-25 called for a four-story 0.5-mile (0.80 km) long U-shaped structure containing 54 contiguous buildings. These were divided into nine sections. Within these were cells of six stages. The cells could be operated independently, or consecutively within a section. Similarly, the sections could be operated separately or as part of a single cascade. A survey party began construction by marking out the 500-acre (2.0 km2) site in May 1943. Work on the main building began in October 1943, and the six-stage pilot plant was ready for operation on 17 April 1944. In 1945 Groves canceled the upper stages of the plant, directing Kellex to instead design and build a 540-stage side feed unit, which became known as K-27. Kellex transferred the last unit to the operating contractor, Union Carbide and Carbon, on 11 September 1945. The total cost, including the K-27 plant completed after the war, came to $480 million.[156]

The production plant commenced operation in February 1945, and as cascade after cascade came online, the quality of the product increased. By April 1945, K-25 had attained a 1.1% enrichment and the output of the S-50 thermal diffusion plant began being used as feed. Some product produced the next month reached nearly 7% enrichment. In August, the last of the 2,892 stages commenced operation. K-25 and K-27 achieved their full potential in the early postwar period, when they eclipsed the other production plants and became the prototypes for a new generation of plants.[157]

Thermal diffusion 
Main article: S-50 Project
The thermal diffusion process was based on Sydney Chapman and David Enskog's theory, which explained that when a mixed gas passes through a temperature gradient, the heavier one tends to concentrate at the cold end and the lighter one at the warm end. Since hot gases tend to rise and cool ones tend to fall, this can be used as a means of isotope separation. This process was first demonstrated by Klaus Clusius and Gerhard Dickel in Germany in 1938.[158] It was developed by US Navy scientists, but was not one of the enrichment technologies initially selected for use in the Manhattan Project. This was primarily due to doubts about its technical feasibility, but the inter-service rivalry between the Army and Navy also played a part.[159]

[Image: A factory with three smoking chimneys on a river bend, viewed from above]  
The S-50 plant is the dark building to the upper left behind the Oak Ridge powerhouse (with smoke stacks).
The Naval Research Laboratory continued the research under Philip Abelson's direction, but there was little contact with the Manhattan Project until April 1944, when Captain William S. Parsons, the naval officer in charge of ordnance development at Los Alamos, brought Oppenheimer news of encouraging progress in the Navy's experiments on thermal diffusion. Oppenheimer wrote to Groves suggesting that the output of a thermal diffusion plant could be fed into Y-12. Groves set up a committee consisting of Warren K. Lewis, Eger Murphree and Richard Tolman to investigate the idea, and they estimated that a thermal diffusion plant costing $3.5 million could enrich 50 kilograms (110 lb) of uranium per week to nearly 0.9% uranium-235. Groves approved its construction on 24 June 1944.[160]

Groves contracted with the H. K. Ferguson Company of Cleveland, Ohio, to build the thermal diffusion plant, which was designated S-50. Groves's advisers, Karl Cohen and W. I. Thompson from Standard Oil,[161] estimated that it would take six months to build. Groves gave Ferguson just four. Plans called for the installation of 2,142 48-foot-tall (15 m) diffusion columns arranged in 21 racks. Inside each column were three concentric tubes. Steam, obtained from the nearby K-25 powerhouse at a pressure of 100 pounds per square inch (690 kPa) and temperature of 545 °F (285 °C), flowed downward through the innermost 1.25-inch (32 mm) nickel pipe, while water at 155 °F (68 °C) flowed upward through the outermost iron pipe. The uranium hexafluoride flowed in the middle copper pipe, and isotope separation of the uranium occurred between the nickel and copper pipes.[162]

Work commenced on 9 July 1944, and S-50 began partial operation in September. Ferguson operated the plant through a subsidiary known as Fercleve. The plant produced just 10.5 pounds (4.8 kg) of 0.852% uranium-235 in October. Leaks limited production and forced shutdowns over the next few months, but in June 1945 it produced 12,730 pounds (5,770 kg).[163] By March 1945, all 21 production racks were operating. Initially the output of S-50 was fed into Y-12, but starting in March 1945 all three enrichment processes were run in series. S-50 became the first stage, enriching from 0.71% to 0.89%. This material was fed into the gaseous diffusion process in the K-25 plant, which produced a product enriched to about 23%. This was, in turn, fed into Y-12,[164] which boosted it to about 89%, sufficient for nuclear weapons.[165]

Aggregate U-235 production 
About 50 kilograms (110 lb) of uranium enriched to 89% uranium-235 was delivered to Los Alamos by July 1945.[165] The entire 50 kg, along with some 50%-enriched, averaging out to about 85% enriched, were used in Little Boy.[165]

Plutonium 
The second line of development pursued by the Manhattan Project used the fissile element plutonium. Although small amounts of plutonium exist in nature, the best way to obtain large quantities of the element is in a nuclear reactor, in which natural uranium is bombarded by neutrons. The uranium-238 is transmuted into uranium-239, which rapidly decays, first into neptunium-239 and then into plutonium-239.[166] Only a small amount of the uranium-238 will be transformed, so the plutonium must be chemically separated from the remaining uranium, from any initial impurities, and from fission products.[166]

X-10 Graphite Reactor 
Main article: X-10 Graphite Reactor
[Image: Two workmen on a movable platform similar to that used by window washers, stick a rod into one of many small holes in the wall in front of them.]  
Workers load uranium slugs into the X-10 Graphite Reactor.
In March 1943, DuPont began construction of a plutonium plant on a 112-acre (0.5 km2) site at Oak Ridge. Intended as a pilot plant for the larger production facilities at Hanford, it included the air-cooled X-10 Graphite Reactor, a chemical separation plant, and support facilities. Because of the subsequent decision to construct water-cooled reactors at Hanford, only the chemical separation plant operated as a true pilot.[167] The X-10 Graphite Reactor consisted of a huge block of graphite, 24 feet (7.3 m) long on each side, weighing around 1,500 short tons (1,400 t), surrounded by 7 feet (2.1 m) of high-density concrete as a radiation shield.[167]

The greatest difficulty was encountered with the uranium slugs produced by Mallinckrodt and Metal Hydrides. These somehow had to be coated in aluminum to avoid corrosion and the escape of fission products into the cooling system. The Grasselli Chemical Company attempted to develop a hot dipping process without success. Meanwhile, Alcoa tried canning. A new process for flux-less welding was developed, and 97% of the cans passed a standard vacuum test, but high temperature tests indicated a failure rate of more than 50%. Nonetheless, production began in June 1943. The Metallurgical Laboratory eventually developed an improved welding technique with the help of General Electric, which was incorporated into the production process in October 1943.[168]

Watched by Fermi and Compton, the X-10 Graphite Reactor went critical on 4 November 1943 with about 30 short tons (27 t) of uranium. A week later the load was increased to 36 short tons (33 t), raising its power generation to 500 kW, and by the end of the month the first 500 mg of plutonium was created.[169] Modifications over time raised the power to 4,000 kW in July 1944. X-10 operated as a production plant until January 1945, when it was turned over to research activities.[170]

Hanford reactors 
Main article: Hanford Site
Although an air-cooled design was chosen for the reactor at Oak Ridge to facilitate rapid construction, it was recognized that this would be impractical for the much larger production reactors. Initial designs by the Metallurgical Laboratory and DuPont used helium for cooling, before they determined that a water-cooled reactor would be simpler, cheaper and quicker to build.[171] The design did not become available until 4 October 1943; in the meantime, Matthias concentrated on improving the Hanford Site by erecting accommodations, improving the roads, building a railway switch line, and upgrading the electricity, water and telephone lines.[172]

[Image: An aerial view of the Hanford B-Reactor site from June 1944. At center is the reactor building. Small trucks dot the landscape and give a sense of scale. Two large water towers loom above the plant.]  
Aerial view of Hanford B-Reactor site, June 1944
As at Oak Ridge, the most difficulty was encountered while canning the uranium slugs, which commenced at Hanford in March 1944. They were pickled to remove dirt and impurities, dipped in molten bronze, tin, and aluminum-silicon alloy, canned using hydraulic presses, and then capped using arc welding under an argon atmosphere. Finally, they were subjected to a series of tests to detect holes or faulty welds. Disappointingly, most canned slugs initially failed the tests, resulting in an output of only a handful of canned slugs per day. But steady progress was made and by June 1944 production increased to the point where it appeared that enough canned slugs would be available to start Reactor B on schedule in August 1944.[173]

Work began on Reactor B, the first of six planned 250 MW reactors, on 10 October 1943.[174] The reactor complexes were given letter designations A through F, with B, D and F sites chosen to be developed first, as this maximised the distance between the reactors. They would be the only ones constructed during the Manhattan Project.[175] Some 390 short tons (350 t) of steel, 17,400 cubic yards (13,300 m3) of concrete, 50,000 concrete blocks and 71,000 concrete bricks were used to construct the 120-foot (37 m) high building.

Construction of the reactor itself commenced in February 1944.[176] Watched by Compton, Matthias, DuPont's Crawford Greenewalt, Leona Woods and Fermi, who inserted the first slug, the reactor was powered up beginning on 13 September 1944. Over the next few days, 838 tubes were loaded and the reactor went critical. Shortly after midnight on 27 September, the operators began to withdraw the control rods to initiate production. At first all appeared well but around 03:00 the power level started to drop and by 06:30 the reactor had shut down completely. The cooling water was investigated to see if there was a leak or contamination. The next day the reactor started up again, only to shut down once more.[177][178]

Fermi contacted Chien-Shiung Wu, who identified the cause of the problem as neutron poisoning from xenon-135, which has a half-life of 9.2 hours.[179] Fermi, Woods, Donald J. Hughes and John Archibald Wheeler then calculated the nuclear cross section of xenon-135, which turned out to be 30,000 times that of uranium.[180] DuPont engineer George Graves had deviated from the Metallurgical Laboratory's original design in which the reactor had 1,500 tubes arranged in a circle, and had added an additional 504 tubes to fill in the corners. The scientists had originally considered this overengineering a waste of time and money, but Fermi realized that by loading all 2,004 tubes, the reactor could reach the required power level and efficiently produce plutonium.[181] Reactor D was started on 17 December 1944 and Reactor F on 25 February 1945.[182]

Separation process 
[Image: A contour map showing the fork of the Columbia and Yakima rivers and the boundary of the land, with seven small red squares marked on it]  
Map of the Hanford Site. Railroads flank the plants to the north and south. Reactors are the three northernmost red squares, along the Columbia River. The separation plants are the lower two red squares from the grouping south of the reactors. The bottom red square is the 300 area.
Meanwhile, the chemists considered the problem of how plutonium could be separated from uranium when its chemical properties were not known. Working with the minute quantities of plutonium available at the Metallurgical Laboratory in 1942, a team under Charles M. Cooper developed a lanthanum fluoride process for separating uranium and plutonium, which was chosen for the pilot separation plant. A second separation process, the bismuth phosphate process, was subsequently developed by Seaborg and Stanly G. Thomson.[183] This process worked by toggling plutonium between its +4 and +6 oxidation states in solutions of bismuth phosphate. In the former state, the plutonium was precipitated; in the latter, it stayed in solution and the other products were precipitated.[184]

Greenewalt favored the bismuth phosphate process due to the corrosive nature of lanthanum fluoride, and it was selected for the Hanford separation plants.[185] Once X-10 began producing plutonium, the pilot separation plant was put to the test. The first batch was processed at 40% efficiency but over the next few months this was raised to 90%.[170]

At Hanford, top priority was initially given to the installations in the 300 area. This contained buildings for testing materials, preparing uranium, and assembling and calibrating instrumentation. One of the buildings housed the canning equipment for the uranium slugs, while another contained a small test reactor. Notwithstanding the high priority allocated to it, work on the 300 area fell behind schedule due to the unique and complex nature of the 300 area facilities, and wartime shortages of labor and materials.[186]

Early plans called for the construction of two separation plants in each of the areas known as 200-West and 200-East. This was subsequently reduced to two, the T and U plants, in 200-West and one, the B plant, at 200-East.[187] Each separation plant consisted of four buildings: a process cell building or "canyon" (known as 221), a concentration building (224), a purification building (231) and a magazine store (213). The canyons were each 800 feet (240 m) long and 65 feet (20 m) wide. Each consisted of forty 17.7-by-13-by-20-foot (5.4 by 4.0 by 6.1 m) cells.[188]

Work began on 221-T and 221-U in January 1944, with the former completed in September and the latter in December. The 221-B building followed in March 1945. Because of the high levels of radioactivity involved, all work in the separation plants had to be conducted by remote control using closed-circuit television, something unheard of in 1943. Maintenance was carried out with the aid of an overhead crane and specially designed tools. The 224 buildings were smaller because they had less material to process, and it was less radioactive. The 224-T and 224-U buildings were completed on 8 October 1944, and 224-B followed on 10 February 1945. The purification methods that were eventually used in 231-W were still unknown when construction commenced on 8 April 1944, but the plant was complete and the methods were selected by the end of the year.[189] On 5 February 1945, Matthias hand-delivered the first shipment of 80 g of 95%-pure plutonium nitrate to a Los Alamos courier in Los Angeles.[182]

Weapon design 
Main article: Project Y
[Image: Long, tube-like casings. In the background are several ovoid casings and a tow truck.]  
A row of Thin Man casings. Fat Man casings are visible in the background.
In 1943, development efforts were directed to a gun-type fission weapon with plutonium called Thin Man. Initial research on the properties of plutonium was done using cyclotron-generated plutonium-239, which was extremely pure, but could only be created in very small amounts. Los Alamos received the first sample of plutonium from the Clinton X-10 reactor in April 1944 and within days Emilio Segrè discovered a problem: the reactor-bred plutonium had a higher concentration of plutonium-240, resulting in up to five times the spontaneous fission rate of cyclotron plutonium.[190] Seaborg had correctly predicted in March 1943 that some of the plutonium-239 would absorb a neutron and become plutonium-240.[191]

This made reactor plutonium unsuitable for use in a gun-type weapon. The plutonium-240 would start the chain reaction too quickly, causing a predetonation that would release enough energy to disperse the critical mass with a minimal amount of plutonium reacted (a fizzle). A faster gun was suggested but found to be impractical. The possibility of separating the isotopes was considered and rejected, as plutonium-240 is even harder to separate from plutonium-239 than uranium-235 from uranium-238.[192]

Work on an alternative method of bomb design, known as implosion, had begun earlier under the direction of the physicist Seth Neddermeyer. Implosion used explosives to crush a subcritical sphere of fissile material into a smaller and denser form. When the fissile atoms are packed closer together, the rate of neutron capture increases, and the mass becomes a critical mass. The metal needs to travel only a very short distance, so the critical mass is assembled in much less time than it would take with the gun method.[193] Neddermeyer's 1943 and early 1944 investigations into implosion showed promise, but also made it clear that the problem would be much more difficult from a theoretical and engineering perspective than the gun design.[194] In September 1943, John von Neumann, who had experience with shaped charges used in armor-piercing shells, argued that not only would implosion reduce the danger of predetonation and fizzle, but would make more efficient use of the fissionable material.[195] He proposed using a spherical configuration instead of the cylindrical one that Neddermeyer was working on.[196]

[Image: Diagram showing fast explosive, slow explosive, uranium tamper, plutonium core and neutron initiator]  
An implosion-type nuclear bomb
By July 1944, Oppenheimer had concluded plutonium could not be used in a gun design, and opted for implosion. The accelerated effort on an implosion design, codenamed Fat Man, began in August 1944 when Oppenheimer implemented a sweeping reorganization of the Los Alamos laboratory to focus on implosion.[197] Two new groups were created at Los Alamos to develop the implosion weapon, X (for explosives) Division headed by explosives expert George Kistiakowsky and G (for gadget) Division under Robert Bacher.[198][199] The new design that von Neumann and T (for theoretical) Division, most notably Rudolf Peierls, had devised used explosive lenses to focus the explosion onto a spherical shape using a combination of both slow and fast high explosives.[200]

The design of lenses that detonated with the proper shape and velocity turned out to be slow, difficult and frustrating.[200] Various explosives were tested before settling on composition B as the fast explosive and baratol as the slow explosive.[201] The final design resembled a soccer ball, with 20 hexagonal and 12 pentagonal lenses, each weighing about 80 pounds (36 kg). Getting the detonation just right required fast, reliable and safe electrical detonators, of which there were two for each lens for reliability.[202] It was therefore decided to use exploding-bridgewire detonators, a new invention developed at Los Alamos by a group led by Luis Alvarez. A contract for their manufacture was given to Raytheon.[203]

To study the behavior of converging shock waves, Robert Serber devised the RaLa Experiment, which used the short-lived radioisotope lanthanum-140, a potent source of gamma radiation. The gamma ray source was placed in the center of a metal sphere surrounded by the explosive lenses, which in turn were inside in an ionization chamber. This allowed the taking of an X-ray movie of the implosion. The lenses were designed primarily using this series of tests.[204] In his history of the Los Alamos project, David Hawkins wrote: "RaLa became the most important single experiment affecting the final bomb design".[205]

Within the explosives was the 4.5-inch (110 mm) thick aluminum pusher, which provided a smooth transition from the relatively low density explosive to the next layer, the 3-inch (76 mm) thick tamper of natural uranium. Its main job was to hold the critical mass together as long as possible, but it would also reflect neutrons back into the core. Some part of it might fission as well. To prevent predetonation by an external neutron, the tamper was coated in a thin layer of boron.[202] A polonium-beryllium modulated neutron initiator, known as an "urchin" because its shape resembled a sea urchin,[206] was developed to start the chain reaction at precisely the right moment.[207] This work with the chemistry and metallurgy of radioactive polonium was directed by Charles Allen Thomas of the Monsanto Company and became known as the Dayton Project.[208] Testing required up to 500 curies per month of polonium, which Monsanto was able to deliver.[209] The whole assembly was encased in a duralumin bomb casing to protect it from bullets and flak.[202]

[Image: A shack surrounded by pine trees. There is snow on the ground. A man and a woman in white lab coats are pulling on a rope, which is attached to a small trolley on a wooden platform. On top of the trolley is a large cylindrical object.]  
Remote handling of a kilocurie source of radiolanthanum for a RaLa Experiment at Los Alamos
The ultimate task of the metallurgists was to determine how to cast plutonium into a sphere. The difficulties became apparent when attempts to measure the density of plutonium gave inconsistent results. At first contamination was believed to be the cause, but it was soon determined that there were multiple allotropes of plutonium.[210] The brittle α phase that exists at room temperature changes to the plastic β phase at higher temperatures. Attention then shifted to the even more malleable δ phase that normally exists in the 300 °C to 450 °C range. It was found that this was stable at room temperature when alloyed with aluminum, but aluminum emits neutrons when bombarded with alpha particles, which would exacerbate the pre-ignition problem. The metallurgists then hit upon a plutonium-gallium alloy, which stabilized the δ phase and could be hot pressed into the desired spherical shape. As plutonium was found to corrode readily, the sphere was coated with nickel.[211]

The work proved dangerous. By the end of the war, half the experienced chemists and metallurgists had to be removed from work with plutonium when unacceptably high levels of the element appeared in their urine.[212] A minor fire at Los Alamos in January 1945 led to a fear that a fire in the plutonium laboratory might contaminate the whole town, and Groves authorized the construction of a new facility for plutonium chemistry and metallurgy, which became known as the DP-site.[213] The hemispheres for the first plutonium pit (or core) were produced and delivered on 2 July 1945. Three more hemispheres followed on 23 July and were delivered three days later.[214]

Trinity 
Main article: Trinity (nuclear test)
Because of the complexity of an implosion-style weapon, it was decided that, despite the waste of fissile material, an initial test would be required. Groves approved the test, subject to the active material being recovered. Consideration was therefore given to a controlled fizzle, but Oppenheimer opted instead for a full-scale nuclear test, codenamed "Trinity".[215]

[Image: Men stand around a large oil-rig type structure. A large round object is being hoisted up.]  
The explosives of "the gadget" were raised to the top of the tower for the final assembly.
In March 1944, planning for the test was assigned to Kenneth Bainbridge, a professor of physics at Harvard, working under Kistiakowsky. Bainbridge selected the bombing range near Alamogordo Army Airfield as the site for the test.[216] Bainbridge worked with Captain Samuel P. Davalos on the construction of the Trinity Base Camp and its facilities, which included barracks, warehouses, workshops, an explosive magazine and a commissary.[217]

Groves did not relish the prospect of explaining the loss of a billion dollars worth of plutonium to a Senate committee, so a cylindrical containment vessel codenamed "Jumbo" was constructed to recover the active material in the event of a failure. Measuring 25 feet (7.6 m) long and 12 feet (3.7 m) wide, it was fabricated at great expense from 214 short tons (194 t) of iron and steel by Babcock & Wilcox in Barberton, Ohio. Brought in a special railroad car to a siding in Pope, New Mexico, it was transported the last 25 miles (40 km) to the test site on a trailer pulled by two tractors.[218] By the time it arrived, however, confidence in the implosion method was high enough, and the availability of plutonium was sufficient, that Oppenheimer decided not to use it. Instead, it was placed atop a steel tower 800 yards (730 m) from the weapon as a rough measure of how powerful the explosion would be. In the end, Jumbo survived, although its tower did not, adding credence to the belief that Jumbo would have successfully contained a fizzled explosion.[219][220]

A pre-test explosion was conducted on 7 May 1945 to calibrate the instruments. A wooden test platform was erected 800 yards (730 m) from Ground Zero and piled with 100 short tons (91 t) of TNT spiked with nuclear fission products in the form of an irradiated uranium slug from Hanford, which was dissolved and poured into tubing inside the explosive. This explosion was observed by Oppenheimer and Groves's new deputy commander, Brigadier General Thomas Farrell. The pre-test produced data that proved vital for the Trinity test.[220][221]

For the actual test, the weapon, nicknamed "the gadget", was hoisted to the top of a 100-foot (30 m) steel tower, as detonation at that height would give a better indication of how the weapon would behave when dropped from a bomber. Detonation in the air maximized the energy applied directly to the target, and generated less nuclear fallout. The gadget was assembled under the supervision of Norris Bradbury at the nearby McDonald Ranch House on 13 July, and precariously winched up the tower the following day.[222] Observers included Bush, Chadwick, Conant, Farrell, Fermi, Groves, Lawrence, Oppenheimer and Tolman. At 05:30 on 16 July 1945 the gadget exploded with an energy equivalent of around 20 kilotons of TNT, leaving a crater of Trinitite (radioactive glass) in the desert 250 feet (76 m) wide. The shock wave was felt over 100 miles (160 km) away, and the mushroom cloud reached 7.5 miles (12.1 km) in height. It was heard as far away as El Paso, Texas, so Groves issued a cover story about an ammunition magazine explosion at Alamogordo Field.[223][224]

The Trinity test of the Manhattan Project was the first detonation of a nuclear weapon.
Oppenheimer later recalled that, while witnessing the explosion, he thought of a verse from the Hindu holy book, the Bhagavad Gita (XI,12):

कालोऽस्मि लोकक्षयकृत्प्रवृद्धो लोकान्समाहर्तुमिह प्रवृत्तः। ऋतेऽपि त्वां न भविष्यन्ति सर्वे येऽवस्थिताः प्रत्यनीकेषु योधाः॥११- ३२॥

If the radiance of a thousand suns were to burst at once into the sky, that would be like the splendor of the mighty one ...[225][226]

Years later he would explain that another verse had also entered his head at that time:

We knew the world would not be the same. A few people laughed, a few people cried. Most people were silent. I remembered the line from the Hindu scripture, the Bhagavad Gita; Vishnu is trying to persuade the Prince that he should do his duty and, to impress him, takes on his multi-armed form and says, 'Now I am become Death, the destroyer of worlds.' I suppose we all thought that, one way or another.[227][a]

Personnel 
In June 1944, the Manhattan Project employed some 129,000 workers, of whom 84,500 were construction workers, 40,500 were plant operators and 1,800 were military personnel. As construction activity fell off, the workforce declined to 100,000 a year later, but the number of military personnel increased to 5,600. Procuring the required numbers of workers, especially highly skilled workers, in competition with other vital wartime programs proved very difficult.[231] In 1943, Groves obtained a special temporary priority for labor from the War Manpower Commission. In March 1944, both the War Production Board and the War Manpower Commission gave the project their highest priority.[232]

[Image: A large crowd of men and women in uniform listens to a fat man in uniform speaking at a microphone. They are wearing the Army Service Forces sleeve patch. The women are at the front and the men at the back. Beside him is the flag of the Army Corps of Engineers. Behind them are wooden two-storey buildings.]  
Major General Leslie R. Groves, Jr., speaks to service personnel Oak Ridge Tennessee in August 1945.
Tolman and Conant, in their role as the project's scientific advisers, drew up a list of candidate scientists and had them rated by scientists already working on the project. Groves then sent a personal letter to the head of their university or company asking for them to be released for essential war work.[233] At the University of Wisconsin–Madison, Stanislaw Ulam gave one of his students, Joan Hinton, an exam early, so she could leave to do war work. A few weeks later, Ulam received a letter from Hans Bethe, inviting him to join the project.[234] Conant personally persuaded Kistiakowsky to join the project.[235]

One source of skilled personnel was the Army itself, particularly the Army Specialized Training Program. In 1943, the MED created the Special Engineer Detachment (SED), with an authorized strength of 675. Technicians and skilled workers drafted into the Army were assigned to the SED. Another source was the Women's Army Corps (WAC). Initially intended for clerical tasks handling classified material, the WACs were soon tapped for technical and scientific tasks as well.[236] On 1 February 1945, all military personnel assigned to the MED, including all SED detachments, were assigned to the 9812th Technical Service Unit, except at Los Alamos, where military personnel other than SED, including the WACs and Military Police, were assigned to the 4817th Service Command Unit.[237]

An Associate Professor of Radiology at the University of Rochester School of Medicine, Stafford L. Warren, was commissioned as a colonel in the United States Army Medical Corps, and appointed as chief of the MED's Medical Section and Groves' medical advisor. Warren's initial task was to staff hospitals at Oak Ridge, Richland and Los Alamos.[238] The Medical Section was responsible for medical research, but also for the MED's health and safety programs. This presented an enormous challenge, because workers were handling a variety of toxic chemicals, using hazardous liquids and gases under high pressures, working with high voltages, and performing experiments involving explosives, not to mention the largely unknown dangers presented by radioactivity and handling fissile materials.[239] Yet in December 1945, the National Safety Council presented the Manhattan Project with the Award of Honor for Distinguished Service to Safety in recognition of its safety record. Between January 1943 and June 1945, there were 62 fatalities and 3,879 disabling injuries, which was about 62 percent below the rate of private industry.[240]

Secrecy 
A 1945 Life article estimated that before the Hiroshima and Nagasaki bombings "probably no more than a few dozen men in the entire country knew the full meaning of the Manhattan Project, and perhaps only a thousand others even were aware that work on atoms was involved." The magazine wrote that the more than 100,000 others employed with the project "worked like moles in the dark". Warned that disclosing the project's secrets was punishable by 10 years in prison or a $10,000 ($113,000 today) fine, they saw enormous quantities of raw materials enter factories with nothing coming out, and monitored "dials and switches while behind thick concrete walls mysterious reactions took place" without knowing the purpose of their jobs.[241][242][243][244][245]

[Image: Uncle Sam has removed his hat and is rolling up his sleeves. On the wall in front of him are three monkeys and the slogan: What you see here/ What you do here/ What you hear here/ When you leave here/ Let it stay here.]  
A billboard encouraging secrecy among Oak Ridge workers
Oak Ridge security personnel considered any private party with more than seven people as suspicious, and residents—who believed that US government agents were secretly among them—avoided repeatedly inviting the same guests. Although original residents of the area could be buried in existing cemeteries, every coffin was reportedly opened for inspection.[245] Everyone, including top military officials, and their automobiles were searched when entering and exiting project facilities. One Oak Ridge worker stated that "if you got inquisitive, you were called on the carpet within two hours by government secret agents. Usually those summoned to explain were then escorted bag and baggage to the gate and ordered to keep going".[246]

Despite being told that their work would help end the war and perhaps all future wars,[246] not seeing or understanding the results of their often tedious duties—or even typical side effects of factory work such as smoke from smokestacks—and the war in Europe ending without the use of their work, caused serious morale problems among workers and caused many rumors to spread. One manager stated after the war:

Well it wasn't that the job was tough ... it was confusing. You see, no one knew what was being made in Oak Ridge, not even me, and a lot of the people thought they were wasting their time here. It was up to me to explain to the dissatisfied workers that they were doing a very important job. When they asked me what, I'd have to tell them it was a secret. But I almost went crazy myself trying to figure out what was going on.[244]

Another worker told of how, working in a laundry, she every day held "a special instrument" to uniforms and listened for "a clicking noise". She learned only after the war that she had been performing the important task of checking for radiation with a geiger counter. To improve morale among such workers Oak Ridge created an extensive system of intramural sports leagues, including 10 baseball teams, 81 softball teams, and 26 football teams.[244]

Censorship 
Security poster, warning office workers to close drawers and put documents in safes when not being used
Voluntary censorship of atomic information began before the Manhattan Project. After the start of the European war in 1939 American scientists began avoiding publishing military-related research, and in 1940 scientific journals began asking the National Academy of Sciences to clear articles. William L. Laurence of The New York Times, who wrote an article on atomic fission in The Saturday Evening Post of 7 September 1940, later learned that government officials asked librarians nationwide in 1943 to withdraw the issue.[247] The Soviets noticed the silence, however. In April 1942 nuclear physicist Georgy Flyorov wrote to Josef Stalin on the absence of articles on nuclear fission in American journals; this resulted in the Soviet Union establishing its own atomic bomb project.[248]

The Manhattan Project operated under tight security lest its discovery induce Axis powers, especially Germany, to accelerate their own nuclear projects or undertake covert operations against the project.[249] The government's Office of Censorship, by contrast, relied on the press to comply with a voluntary code of conduct it published, and the project at first avoided notifying the office. By early 1943 newspapers began publishing reports of large construction in Tennessee and Washington based on public records, and the office began discussing with the project how to maintain secrecy. In June the Office of Censorship asked newspapers and broadcasters to avoid discussing "atom smashing, atomic energy, atomic fission, atomic splitting, or any of their equivalents. The use for military purposes of radium or radioactive materials, heavy water, high voltage discharge equipment, cyclotrons." The office also asked to avoid discussion of "polonium, uranium, ytterbium, hafnium, protactinium, radium, rhenium, thorium, deuterium"; only uranium was sensitive, but was listed with other elements to hide its importance.[250][251]

Soviet spies 
Main article: Atomic spies
The prospect of sabotage was always present, and sometimes suspected when there were equipment failures. While there were some problems believed to be the result of careless or disgruntled employees, there were no confirmed instances of Axis-instigated sabotage.[252] However, on 10 March 1945, a Japanese fire balloon struck a power line, and the resulting power surge caused the three reactors at Hanford to be temporarily shut down.[253] With so many people involved, security was a difficult task. A special Counter Intelligence Corps detachment was formed to handle the project's security issues.[254] By 1943, it was clear that the Soviet Union was attempting to penetrate the project. Lieutenant Colonel Boris T. Pash, the head of the Counter Intelligence Branch of the Western Defense Command, investigated suspected Soviet espionage at the Radiation Laboratory in Berkeley. Oppenheimer informed Pash that he had been approached by a fellow professor at Berkeley, Haakon Chevalier, about passing information to the Soviet Union.[255]

The most successful Soviet spy was Klaus Fuchs, a member of the British Mission who played an important part at Los Alamos.[256] The 1950 revelation of his espionage activities damaged the United States' nuclear cooperation with Britain and Canada.[257] Subsequently, other instances of espionage were uncovered, leading to the arrest of Harry Gold, David Greenglass, and Ethel and Julius Rosenberg.[258] Other spies like George Koval and Theodore Hall remained unknown for decades.[259] The value of the espionage is difficult to quantify, as the principal constraint on the Soviet atomic bomb project was a shortage of uranium ore. The consensus is that espionage saved the Soviets one or two years of effort.[260]

Foreign intelligence 
Main article: Alsos Mission
In addition to developing the atomic bomb, the Manhattan Project was charged with gathering intelligence on the German nuclear energy project. It was believed that the Japanese nuclear weapons program was not far advanced because Japan had little access to uranium ore, but it was initially feared that Germany was very close to developing its own weapons. At the instigation of the Manhattan Project, a bombing and sabotage campaign was carried out against heavy water plants in German-occupied Norway.[261] A small mission was created, jointly staffed by the Office of Naval Intelligence, OSRD, the Manhattan Project, and Army Intelligence (G-2), to investigate enemy scientific developments. It was not restricted to those involving nuclear weapons.[262] The Chief of Army Intelligence, Major General George V. Strong, appointed Boris Pash to command the unit,[263] which was codenamed "Alsos", a Greek word meaning "grove".[264]

[Image: Soldiers and workmen, some wearing steel helmet, clamber over what looks like a giant manhole.]  
Allied soldiers dismantle the German experimental nuclear reactor at Haigerloch.
The Alsos Mission to Italy questioned staff of the physics laboratory at the University of Rome following the capture of the city in June 1944.[265] Meanwhile, Pash formed a combined British and American Alsos mission in London under the command of Captain Horace K. Calvert to participate in Operation Overlord.[266] Groves considered the risk that the Germans might attempt to disrupt the Normandy landings with radioactive poisons was sufficient to warn General Dwight D. Eisenhower and send an officer to brief his chief of staff, Lieutenant General Walter Bedell Smith.[267] Under the codename Operation Peppermint, special equipment was prepared and Chemical Warfare Service teams were trained in its use.[268]

Following in the wake of the advancing Allied armies, Pash and Calvert interviewed Frédéric Joliot-Curie about the activities of German scientists. They spoke to officials at Union Minière du Haut Katanga about uranium shipments to Germany. They tracked down 68 tons of ore in Belgium and 30 tons in France. The interrogation of German prisoners indicated that uranium and thorium were being processed in Oranienburg, 20 miles north of Berlin, so Groves arranged for it to be bombed on 15 March 1945.[269]

An Alsos team went to Stassfurt in the Soviet Occupation Zone and retrieved 11 tons of ore from WIFO.[270] In April 1945, Pash, in command of a composite force known as T-Force, conducted Operation Harborage, a sweep behind enemy lines of the cities of Hechingen, Bisingen, and Haigerloch that were the heart of the German nuclear effort. T-Force captured the nuclear laboratories, documents, equipment and supplies, including heavy water and 1.5 tons of metallic uranium.[271][272]

Alsos teams rounded up German scientists including Kurt Diebner, Otto Hahn, Walther Gerlach, Werner Heisenberg, and Carl Friedrich von Weizsäcker, who were taken to England where they were interned at Farm Hall, a bugged house in Godmanchester. After the bombs were detonated in Japan, the Germans were forced to confront the fact that the Allies had done what they could not.[273]

Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki 
Main article: Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki
Preparations 
Starting in November 1943, the Army Air Forces Materiel Command at Wright Field, Ohio, began Silverplate, the codename modification of B-29s to carry the bombs. Test drops were carried out at Muroc Army Air Field, California, and the Naval Ordnance Test Station at Inyokern, California.[274] Groves met with the Chief of United States Army Air Forces (USAAF), General Henry H. Arnold, in March 1944 to discuss the delivery of the finished bombs to their targets.[275] The only Allied aircraft capable of carrying the 17-foot (5.2 m) long Thin Man or the 59-inch (150 cm) wide Fat Man was the British Avro Lancaster, but using a British aircraft would have caused difficulties with maintenance. Groves hoped that the American Boeing B-29 Superfortress could be modified to carry Thin Man by joining its two bomb bays together.[276] Arnold promised that no effort would be spared to modify B-29s to do the job, and designated Major General Oliver P. Echols as the USAAF liaison to the Manhattan Project. In turn, Echols named Colonel Roscoe C. Wilson as his alternate, and Wilson became Manhattan Project's main USAAF contact.[275] President Roosevelt instructed Groves that if the atomic bombs were ready before the war with Germany ended, he should be ready to drop them on Germany.[277]

[Image: A shiny metal four-engined aircraft stands on a runway. The crew pose in front of it.]  
Silverplate B-29 Straight Flush. The tail code of the 444th Bombardment Group is painted on for security reasons.
The 509th Composite Group was activated on 17 December 1944 at Wendover Army Air Field, Utah, under the command of Colonel Paul W. Tibbets. This base, close to the border with Nevada, was codenamed "Kingman" or "W-47". Training was conducted at Wendover and at Batista Army Airfield, Cuba, where the 393d Bombardment Squadron practiced long-distance flights over water, and dropping dummy pumpkin bombs. A special unit known as Project Alberta was formed at Los Alamos under Navy Captain William S. Parsons from Project Y as part of the Manhattan Project to assist in preparing and delivering the bombs.[278] Commander Frederick L. Ashworth from Alberta met with Fleet Admiral Chester W. Nimitz on Guam in February 1945 to inform him of the project. While he was there, Ashworth selected North Field on the Pacific Island Tinian as a base for the 509th Composite Group, and reserved space for the group and its buildings. The group deployed there in July 1945.[279] Farrell arrived at Tinian on 30 July as the Manhattan Project representative.[280]

Most of the components for Little Boy left San Francisco on the cruiser USS Indianapolis on 16 July and arrived on Tinian on 26 July. Four days later the ship was sunk by a Japanese submarine. The remaining components, which included six uranium-235 rings, were delivered by three C-54 Skymasters of the 509th Group's 320th Troop Carrier Squadron.[281] Two Fat Man assemblies travelled to Tinian in specially modified 509th Composite Group B-29s. The first plutonium core went in a special C-54.[282] A joint targeting committee of the Manhattan District and USAAF was established to determine which cities in Japan should be targets, and recommended Kokura, Hiroshima, Niigata, and Kyoto. At this point, Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson intervened, announcing that he would be making the targeting decision, and that he would not authorize the bombing of Kyoto on the grounds of its historical and religious significance. Groves therefore asked Arnold to remove Kyoto not just from the list of nuclear targets, but from targets for conventional bombing as well.[283] One of Kyoto's substitutes was Nagasaki.[284]

Bombings 
In May 1945, the Interim Committee was created to advise on wartime and postwar use of nuclear energy. The committee was chaired by Stimson, with James F. Byrnes, a former US Senator soon to be Secretary of State, as President Harry S. Truman's personal representative; Ralph A. Bard, the Under Secretary of the Navy; William L. Clayton, the Assistant Secretary of State; Vannevar Bush; Karl T. Compton; James B. Conant; and George L. Harrison, an assistant to Stimson and president of New York Life Insurance Company. The Interim Committee in turn established a scientific panel consisting of Arthur Compton, Fermi, Lawrence and Oppenheimer to advise it on scientific issues. In its presentation to the Interim Committee, the scientific panel offered its opinion not just on the likely physical effects of an atomic bomb, but on its probable military and political impact.[285]

At the Potsdam Conference in Germany, Truman was informed that the Trinity test had been successful. He told Stalin, the leader of the Soviet Union, that the US had a new superweapon, without giving any details. This was the first official communication to the Soviet Union about the bomb, but Stalin already knew about it from spies.[286] With the authorization to use the bomb against Japan already given, no alternatives were considered after the Japanese rejection of the Potsdam Declaration.[287]

[Image: Two mushroom clouds rise vertically.]  
Little Boy explodes over Hiroshima, Japan, 6 August 1945 (left);
Fat Man explodes over Nagasaki, Japan, 9 August 1945 (right).
On 6 August 1945, a Boeing B-29 Superfortress (Enola Gay) of the 393d Bombardment Squadron, piloted by Tibbets, lifted off from North Field, and Little Boy in its bomb bay. Hiroshima, the headquarters of the 2nd General Army and Fifth Division and a port of embarkation, was the primary target of the mission, with Kokura and Nagasaki as alternatives. With Farrell's permission, Parsons, the weaponeer in charge of the mission, completed the bomb assembly in the air to minimize the risks during takeoff.[288] The bomb detonated at an altitude of 1,750 feet (530 m) with a blast that was later estimated to be the equivalent of 13 kilotons of TNT.[289] An area of approximately 4.7 square miles (12 km2) was destroyed. Japanese officials determined that 69% of Hiroshima's buildings were destroyed and another 6–7% damaged. About 70,000 to 80,000 people, of whom 20,000 were Japanese combatants and 20,000 were Korean slave laborers, or some 30% of the population of Hiroshima, were killed immediately, and another 70,000 injured.[290][291][292]

On the morning of 9 August 1945, a second B-29 (Bockscar), piloted by the 393d Bombardment Squadron's commander, Major Charles W. Sweeney, lifted off with Fat Man on board. This time, Ashworth served as weaponeer and Kokura was the primary target. Sweeney took off with the weapon already armed but with the electrical safety plugs still engaged. When they reached Kokura, they found cloud cover had obscured the city, prohibiting the visual attack required by orders. After three runs over the city, and with fuel running low, they headed for the secondary target, Nagasaki. Ashworth decided that a radar approach would be used if the target was obscured, but a last-minute break in the clouds over Nagasaki allowed a visual approach as ordered. The Fat Man was dropped over the city's industrial valley midway between the Mitsubishi Steel and Arms Works in the south and the Mitsubishi-Urakami Ordnance Works in the north. The resulting explosion had a blast yield equivalent to 21 kilotons of TNT, roughly the same as the Trinity blast, but was confined to the Urakami Valley, and a major portion of the city was protected by the intervening hills, resulting in the destruction of about 44% of the city. The bombing also crippled the city's industrial production extensively and killed 23,200–28,200 Japanese industrial workers and 150 Japanese soldiers.[293] Overall, an estimated 35,000–40,000 people were killed and 60,000 injured.[294][295]

Groves expected to have another atomic bomb ready for use on 19 August, with three more in September and a further three in October.[296] Two more Fat Man assemblies were readied, and scheduled to leave Kirtland Field for Tinian on 11 and 14 August.[295] At Los Alamos, technicians worked 24 hours straight to cast another plutonium core.[297] Although cast, it still needed to be pressed and coated, which would take until 16 August.[298] It could therefore have been ready for use on 19 August. On 10 August, Truman secretly requested that additional atomic bombs not be dropped on Japan without his express authority.[299] Groves suspended the third core's shipment on his own authority on 13 August.[299]

On 11 August, Groves phoned Warren with orders to organize a survey team to report on the damage and radioactivity at Hiroshima and Nagasaki. A party equipped with portable Geiger counters arrived in Hiroshima on 8 September headed by Farrell and Warren, with Japanese Rear Admiral Masao Tsuzuki, who acted as a translator. They remained in Hiroshima until 14 September and then surveyed Nagasaki from 19 September to 8 October.[300] This and other scientific missions to Japan would provide valuable scientific and historical data.[301]

The necessity of the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki became a subject of controversy among historians. Some questioned whether an "atomic diplomacy" would not have attained the same goals and disputed whether the bombings or the Soviet declaration of war on Japan was decisive.[296] The Franck Report was the most notable effort pushing for a demonstration but was turned down by the Interim Committee's scientific panel.[302] The Szilárd petition, drafted in July 1945 and signed by dozens of scientists working on the Manhattan Project, was a late attempt at warning President Harry S. Truman about his responsibility in using such weapons.[303][304]

After the war 
[Image: Men in suits and uniforms stand on a dais decorated with bunting and salute.]  
Presentation of the Army–Navy "E" Award at Los Alamos on 16 October 1945. Standing, left to right: J. Robert Oppenheimer, unidentified, unidentified, Kenneth Nichols, Leslie Groves, Robert Gordon Sproul, William Sterling Parsons.
Seeing the work they had not understood produce the Hiroshima and Nagasaki bombs amazed the workers of the Manhattan Project as much as the rest of the world; newspapers in Oak Ridge announcing the Hiroshima bomb sold for $1 ($11 today).[242][251] Although the bombs' existence was public, secrecy continued, and many workers remained ignorant of their jobs; one stated in 1946, "I don't know what the hell I'm doing besides looking into a ——— and turning a ——— alongside a ———. I don't know anything about it, and there's nothing to say". Many residents continued to avoid discussion of "the stuff" in ordinary conversation despite it being the reason for their town's existence.[245]

In anticipation of the bombings, Groves had Henry DeWolf Smyth prepare a history for public consumption. Atomic Energy for Military Purposes, better known as the "Smyth Report", was released to the public on 12 August 1945.[305] Groves and Nichols presented Army–Navy "E" Awards to key contractors, whose involvement had hitherto been secret. Over 20 awards of the Presidential Medal for Merit were made to key contractors and scientists, including Bush and Oppenheimer. Military personnel received the Legion of Merit, including the commander of the Women's Army Corps detachment, Captain Arlene G. Scheidenhelm.[306]

At Hanford, plutonium production fell off as Reactors B, D and F wore out, poisoned by fission products and swelling of the graphite moderator known as the Wigner effect. The swelling damaged the charging tubes where the uranium was irradiated to produce plutonium, rendering them unusable. In order to maintain the supply of polonium for the urchin initiators, production was curtailed and the oldest unit, B pile, was closed down so at least one reactor would be available in the future. Research continued, with DuPont and the Metallurgical Laboratory developing a redox solvent extraction process as an alternative plutonium extraction technique to the bismuth phosphate process, which left unspent uranium in a state from which it could not easily be recovered.[307]

Bomb engineering was carried out by the Z Division, named for its director, Dr. Jerrold R. Zacharias from Los Alamos. Z Division was initially located at Wendover Field but moved to Oxnard Field, New Mexico, in September 1945 to be closer to Los Alamos. This marked the beginning of Sandia Base. Nearby Kirtland Field was used as a B-29 base for aircraft compatibility and drop tests.[308] By October, all the staff and facilities at Wendover had been transferred to Sandia.[309] As reservist officers were demobilized, they were replaced by about fifty hand-picked regular officers.[310]

Nichols recommended that S-50 and the Alpha tracks at Y-12 be closed down. This was done in September.[311] Although performing better than ever,[312] the Alpha tracks could not compete with K-25 and the new K-27, which had commenced operation in January 1946. In December, the Y-12 plant was closed, thereby cutting the Tennessee Eastman payroll from 8,600 to 1,500 and saving $2 million a month.[313]

[Image: A man in a suit is seated at a desk, signing a document. Seven men in suits gather around him.]  
President Harry S. Truman signs the Atomic Energy Act of 1946, establishing the United States Atomic Energy Commission.
Nowhere was demobilization more of a problem than at Los Alamos, where there was an exodus of talent. Much remained to be done. The bombs used on Hiroshima and Nagasaki were like laboratory pieces; work would be required to make them simpler, safer and more reliable. Implosion methods needed to be developed for uranium in place of the wasteful gun method, and composite uranium-plutonium cores were needed now that plutonium was in short supply because of the problems with the reactors. However, uncertainty about the future of the laboratory made it hard to induce people to stay. Oppenheimer returned to his job at the University of California and Groves appointed Norris Bradbury as an interim replacement. In fact, Bradbury would remain in the post for the next 25 years.[309] Groves attempted to combat the dissatisfaction caused by the lack of amenities with a construction program that included an improved water supply, three hundred houses, and recreation facilities.[307]

Two Fat Man–type detonations were conducted at Bikini Atoll in July 1946 as part of Operation Crossroads to investigate the effect of nuclear weapons on warships.[314] Able was detonated on 1 July 1946. The more spectacular Baker was detonated underwater on 25 July 1946.[315]

After the bombings at Hiroshima and Nagasaki, a number of Manhattan Project physicists founded the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, which began as an emergency action undertaken by scientists who saw urgent need for an immediate educational program about atomic weapons.[316] In the face of the destructiveness of the new weapons and in anticipation of the nuclear arms race several project members including Bohr, Bush and Conant expressed the view that it was necessary to reach agreement on international control of nuclear research and atomic weapons. The Baruch Plan, unveiled in a speech to the newly formed United Nations Atomic Energy Commission (UNAEC) in June 1946, proposed the establishment of an international atomic development authority, but was not adopted.[317]

Following a domestic debate over the permanent management of the nuclear program, the United States Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) was created by the Atomic Energy Act of 1946 to take over the functions and assets of the Manhattan Project. It established civilian control over atomic development, and separated the development, production and control of atomic weapons from the military. Military aspects were taken over by the Armed Forces Special Weapons Project (AFSWP).[318] Although the Manhattan Project ceased to exist on 31 December 1946, the Manhattan District was not abolished until 15 August 1947.[319]

Cost  Manhattan Project costs through 31 December 1945[320] Site Cost (1945 USD) Cost (2018 USD) % of total Oak Ridge $1.19 billion $13.4 billion 62.9 % Hanford $390 million $4.4 billion 20.6 % Special operating materials $103 million $1.17 billion 5.5 % Los Alamos $74.1 million $835 million 3.9 % Research and development $69.7 million $786 million 3.7 % Government overhead $37.3 million $420 million 2.0 % Heavy water plants $26.8 million $302 million 1.4 % Total $1.89 billion $21.3 billion
The project expenditure through 1 October 1945 was $1.845 billion, equivalent to less than nine days of wartime spending, and was $2.191 billion when the AEC assumed control on 1 January 1947. Total allocation was $2.4 billion. Over 90% of the cost was for building plants and producing the fissionable materials, and less than 10% for development and production of the weapons.[321][322]

A total of four weapons (the Trinity gadget, Little Boy, Fat Man, and an unused Fat Man bomb) were produced by the end of 1945, making the average cost per bomb around $500 million in 1945 dollars. By comparison, the project's total cost by the end of 1945 was about 90% of the total spent on the production of US small arms (not including ammunition) and 34% of the total spent on US tanks during the same period.[320] Overall, it was the second most expensive weapons project undertaken by the United States in World War II, behind only the design and production of the Boeing B-29 Superfortress.[323]

Legacy 
See also: Nuclear weapons in popular culture
The political and cultural impacts of the development of nuclear weapons were profound and far-reaching. William Laurence of The New York Times, the first to use the phrase "Atomic Age",[324] became the official correspondent for the Manhattan Project in spring 1945. In 1943 and 1944 he unsuccessfully attempted to persuade the Office of Censorship to permit writing about the explosive potential of uranium, and government officials felt that he had earned the right to report on the biggest secret of the war. Laurence witnessed both the Trinity test[325] and the bombing of Nagasaki and wrote the official press releases prepared for them. He went on to write a series of articles extolling the virtues of the new weapon. His reporting before and after the bombings helped to spur public awareness of the potential of nuclear technology and motivated its development in the United States and the Soviet Union.[326]

The Lake Ontario Ordnance Works (LOOW) near Niagara Falls became a principal repository for Manhattan Project waste for the Eastern United States.[327] All of the radioactive materials stored at the LOOW site—including thorium, uranium, and the world's largest concentration of radium-226—were buried in an "Interim Waste Containment Structure" (in the foreground) in 1991.[328][329][330]
The wartime Manhattan Project left a legacy in the form of the network of national laboratories: the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Argonne National Laboratory, and Ames Laboratory. Two more were established by Groves soon after the war, the Brookhaven National Laboratory at Upton, New York, and the Sandia National Laboratories at Albuquerque, New Mexico. Groves allocated $72 million to them for research activities in fiscal year 1946–1947.[331] They would be in the vanguard of the kind of large-scale research that Alvin Weinberg, the director of the Oak Ridge National Laboratory, would call Big Science.[332]

The Naval Research Laboratory had long been interested in the prospect of using nuclear power for warship propulsion, and sought to create its own nuclear project. In May 1946, Nimitz, now Chief of Naval Operations, decided that the Navy should instead work with the Manhattan Project. A group of naval officers were assigned to Oak Ridge, the most senior of whom was Captain Hyman G. Rickover, who became assistant director there. They immersed themselves in the study of nuclear energy, laying the foundations for a nuclear-powered navy.[333] A similar group of Air Force personnel arrived at Oak Ridge in September 1946 with the aim of developing nuclear aircraft.[334] Their Nuclear Energy for the Propulsion of Aircraft (NEPA) project ran into formidable technical difficulties, and was ultimately cancelled.[335]

The ability of the new reactors to create radioactive isotopes in previously unheard-of quantities sparked a revolution in nuclear medicine in the immediate postwar years. Starting in mid-1946, Oak Ridge began distributing radioisotopes to hospitals and universities. Most of the orders were for iodine-131 and phosphorus-32, which were used in the diagnosis and treatment of cancer. In addition to medicine, isotopes were also used in biological, industrial and agricultural research.[336]

On handing over control to the Atomic Energy Commission, Groves bid farewell to the people who had worked on the Manhattan Project:

Five years ago, the idea of Atomic Power was only a dream. You have made that dream a reality. You have seized upon the most nebulous of ideas and translated them into actualities. You have built cities where none were known before. You have constructed industrial plants of a magnitude and to a precision heretofore deemed impossible. You built the weapon which ended the War and thereby saved countless American lives. With regard to peacetime applications, you have raised the curtain on vistas of a new world.[337]

In 2014, the United States Congress passed a law providing for a national park dedicated to the history of the Manhattan Project.[338] The Manhattan Project National Historical Park was established on 10 November 2015.[339]

Notes 

Footnotes

    ^  The reaction Teller was most concerned with was: 14
    7 N
       + 14
    7 N
       → 24
    12 Mg
       + 4
    2 He
       (alpha particle) + 17.7 MeV.[30] 
    ^  In Bethe's account, the possibility of this ultimate catastrophe came up again in 1975 when it appeared in a magazine article by H.C. Dudley, who got the idea from a report by Pearl Buck of an interview she had with Arthur Compton in 1959. The worry was not entirely extinguished in some people's minds until the Trinity test.[33] 
    ^  Natural self-sustaining nuclear reactions have occurred in the distant past.[103] 
    ^  The allusion here is to the Italian navigator Christopher Columbus, who reached the Caribbean in 1492. 

Citations

    ^  Jones 1985, p. 12. 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, pp. 16–20. 
    ^  "Fermi at Columbia | Department of Physics". physics.columbia.edu. Retrieved 29 July  2019 .  
    ^  Rhodes 1986, pp. 337–338. 
    ^ a b  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, pp. 40–41. 
    ^  "Executive Order 8807 Establishing the Office of Scientific Research and Development". 28 June 1941. Retrieved 28 June  2011 .  
    ^  Jones 1985, p. 33. 
    ^  Rhodes 1986, pp. 322–325. 
    ^ a b  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, p. 42. 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, pp. 39–40. 
    ^  Phelps 2010, pp. 126–128. 
    ^  Phelps 2010, pp. 282–283. 
    ^  Rhodes 1986, pp. 372–374. 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, pp. 43–44. 
    ^  Jones 1985, pp. 30–32. 
    ^  Jones 1985, p. 35. 
    ^  Williams 1960, pp. 3–4. 
    ^ a b c  Jones 1985, pp. 37–39. 
    ^  Nichols 1987, pp. 32. 
    ^  Jones 1985, pp. 35–36. 
    ^  Rhodes 1986, p. 416. 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, p. 103. 
    ^  Hoddeson et al. 1993, pp. 42–44 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, pp. 33–35. 
    ^  Groves 1962, p. 41. 
    ^  Serber & Rhodes 1992, p. 21. 
    ^  Hoddeson et al. 1993, pp. 54–56 
    ^  Rhodes 1986, p. 417. 
    ^  Hoddeson et al. 1993, pp. 44–45 
    ^  Bethe 1991, p. 30. 
    ^  Rhodes 1986, p. 419. 
    ^  Konopinski, E. J; Marvin, C.; Teller, Edward (1946). "Ignition of the Atmosphere with Nuclear Bombs" (PDF) . Los Alamos National Laboratory. Retrieved 23 November  2008 .  
    ^  Bethe 1991, pp. xi, 30. 
    ^  Broad, William J. (30 October 2007). "Why They Called It the Manhattan Project". The New York Times. Retrieved 27 October  2010 .  
    ^ a b  Jones 1985, pp. 41–44. 
    ^  Fine & Remington 1972, p. 652. 
    ^  Nichols 1987, p. 174. 
    ^  Groves 1962, p. 40. 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, pp. 76–78. 
    ^  Fine & Remington 1972, p. 654. 
    ^  Jones 1985, pp. 57–61. 
    ^ a b  Fine & Remington 1972, p. 657. 
    ^  "Science:Atomic Footprint". Time. 17 September 1945. Retrieved 16 March  2011 .  
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, p. 81. 
    ^ a b  Jones 1985, pp. 74–77. 
    ^  Groves 1962, pp. 4–5. 
    ^  Fine & Remington 1972, pp. 659–661. 
    ^  Groves 1962, pp. 27–28. 
    ^  Groves 1962, pp. 44–45. 
    ^  Groves 1962, pp. 22–23. 
    ^  Jones 1985, pp. 80–82. 
    ^ a b  Ermenc 1989, p. 238. 
    ^  Groves 1962, pp. 61–63. 
    ^  Nichols 1987, pp. 72–73. 
    ^  Bernstein 1976, pp. 206–207. 
    ^ a b  Villa 1981, pp. 144–145 
    ^  Bernstein 1976, pp. 206–208. 
    ^  Bernstein 1976, p. 208. 
    ^ a b  Stacey 1970, p. 517 
    ^  Bernstein 1976, p. 211. 
    ^  Bernstein 1976, pp. 209–212. 
    ^ a b c d e  Fakley, Dennis C. (Winter–Spring 1983). "The British Mission". Los Alamos Science (7): 186–189.  
    ^  Bernstein 1976, pp. 213. 
    ^  Gowing 1964, pp. 168–173. 
    ^  Bernstein 1976, pp. 216–217. 
    ^  Gowing 1964, pp. 340–342. 
    ^  Jones 1985, p. 296. 
    ^  Gowing 1964, p. 234. 
    ^  Gowing 1964, pp. 242–244. 
    ^  Hunner 2004, p. 26. 
    ^  Gowing 1964, p. 372. 
    ^  Bernstein 1976, pp. 223–224. 
    ^  Jones 1985, pp. 90, 299–306. 
    ^ a b  Johnson & Jackson 1981, pp. 168–169. 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, pp. 116–117. 
    ^  Groves 1962, pp. 25–26. 
    ^  Jones 1985, p. 78. 
    ^ a b  Johnson & Jackson 1981, pp. 39–43. 
    ^  Fine & Remington 1972, pp. 663–664. 
    ^  "Oak Ridge National Laboratory Review, Vol. 25, Nos. 3 and 4, 2002". ornl.gov. Archived from the original on 25 August 2009. Retrieved 9 March  2010 .  
    ^  Jones 1985, pp. 327–328. 
    ^  Johnson & Jackson 1981, p. 49. 
    ^  Johnson & Jackson 1981, p. 8. 
    ^  Johnson & Jackson 1981, pp. 14–17. 
    ^  Jones 1985, p. 88. 
    ^ a b  Jones 1985, pp. 443–446. 
    ^  William J. (Bill) Wilcox Jr., Oak Ridge City Historian, Retired Technical Director for the Oak Ridge Y-12 & K-25 Plants, 11 November 2007, Early Days of Oak Ridge and Wartime Y-12, Retrieved 22 November 2014 
    ^  "Josephine Herrick's Photo Legacy Comes Into View". Women's enews. Archived from the original on 6 September 2015. Retrieved 7 September  2015 .  
    ^  Jones 1985, pp. 83–84. 
    ^  Fine & Remington 1972, pp. 664–665. 
    ^  "50th Anniversary Article: Oppenheimer's Better Idea: Ranch School Becomes Arsenal of Democracy". Los Alamos National Laboratory. Retrieved 6 April  2011 .  
    ^  Groves 1962, pp. 66–67. 
    ^ a b  Jones 1985, pp. 328–331. 
    ^  "Secretary of Agriculture granting use of land for Demolition Range" (PDF) . Los Alamos National Laboratory. 8 April 1943. Retrieved 6 April  2011 .  
    ^  Hunner 2004, pp. 31–32. 
    ^  Hunner 2004, p. 29. 
    ^  Hunner 2004, p. 40. 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, pp. 230–232. 
    ^  Jones 1985, pp. 67–71. 
    ^ a b  "Site A/Plot M, Illinois, Decommissioned Reactor Site Fact Sheet" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF)  on 26 October 2014. Retrieved 3 December  2012 .  
    ^  "FRONTIERS Research Highlights 1946–1996". Officeof PublicAffairs, ArgonneNational Laboratory. 1996: 11. doi:10.2172/770687. OSTI 770687.  
    ^  Walsh, John (19 June 1981). "A Manhattan Project Postscript" (PDF) . Science. 212 (4501): 1369–1371. Bibcode:1981Sci...212.1369W. doi:10.1126/science.212.4501.1369. ISSN 0036-8075. PMID 17746246. Retrieved 23 March  2013 .  
    ^  Libby 1979, pp. 214–216. 
    ^  "CP-1 (Chicago Pile 1 Reactor)". Argonne National Laboratory; U.S. Department of Energy. Retrieved 12 April  2013 .  
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, pp. 108–112. 
    ^  Jones 1985, pp. 195–196. 
    ^  Holl, Hewlett & Harris 1997, p. 428. 
    ^  Fermi, Enrico (1946). "The Development of the first chain reaction pile". Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society. 90 (1): 20–24. JSTOR 3301034.  
    ^  Groves 1962, pp. 58–59. 
    ^  Groves 1962, pp. 68–69. 
    ^ a b  Jones 1985, pp. 108–111. 
    ^  Jones 1985, p. 342. 
    ^  Jones 1985, pp. 452–457. 
    ^  Thayer 1996, p. 16. 
    ^  Jones 1985, p. 401. 
    ^  Jones 1985, pp. 463–464. 
    ^ a b  Waltham 2002, pp. 8–9. 
    ^  "ZEEP – Canada's First Nuclear Reactor". Canada Science and Technology Museum. Archived from the original on 6 March 2014.  
    ^  Jones 1985, pp. 8, 62. 
    ^  Jones 1985, pp. 107–108. 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, pp. 201–202. 
    ^  Smyth 1945, p. 39. 
    ^  Smyth 1945, p. 92. 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, pp. 85–86. 
    ^  Jones 1985, p. 295. 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, pp. 285–288. 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, pp. 291–292. 
    ^  Ruhoff & Fain 1962, pp. 3–9. 
    ^  Hoddeson et al. 1993, p. 31 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, pp. 87–88. 
    ^  Smyth 1945, pp. 154–156. 
    ^  Jones 1985, p. 157. 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, pp. 22–23. 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, p. 30. 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, p. 64. 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, pp. 96–97. 
    ^  Nichols 1987, p. 64. 
    ^ a b  Jones 1985, pp. 117–119. 
    ^  Smyth 1945, pp. 164–165. 
    ^ a b  Fine & Remington 1972, p. 684. 
    ^  Nichols 1987, p. 42. 
    ^ a b  Jones 1985, p. 133. 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, p. 153. 
    ^  Jones 1985, p. 67. 
    ^  Jones 1985, pp. 126–132. 
    ^  Jones 1985, pp. 138–139. 
    ^  "The Calutron Girls". SmithDRay. Retrieved 22 June  2011 .  
    ^  Jones 1985, p. 140. 
    ^  Nichols 1987, p. 131. 
    ^  Jones 1985, pp. 143–148. 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, pp. 30–32, 96–98 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, p. 108. 
    ^  Jones 1985, pp. 150–151. 
    ^  Jones 1985, pp. 154–157. 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, pp. 126–127. 
    ^  Jones 1985, pp. 158–165. 
    ^  Jones 1985, pp. 167–171. 
    ^  Smyth 1945, pp. 161–162. 
    ^  Jones 1985, p. 172. 
    ^  Jones 1985, pp. 175–177. 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, pp. 170–172. 
    ^  Jones 1985, pp. 178–179. 
    ^  Jones 1985, pp. 180–183. 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, pp. 300–302. 
    ^ a b c  Hansen 1995b, p. V-112. 
    ^ a b  Smyth 1945, pp. 130–132. 
    ^ a b  Jones 1985, pp. 204–206. 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, pp. 208–210. 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, p. 211. 
    ^ a b  Jones 1985, p. 209. 
    ^  Groves 1962, pp. 78–82. 
    ^  Jones 1985, p. 210. 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, pp. 222–226. 
    ^  Thayer 1996, p. 139. 
    ^  Hanford Cultural and Historic Resources Program 2002, p. 1.16 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, pp. 216–217. 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, pp. 304–307. 
    ^  Jones 1985, pp. 220–223. 
    ^  Howes & Herzenberg 1999, p. 45. 
    ^  Libby 1979, pp. 182–183. 
    ^  Thayer 1996, p. 10. 
    ^ a b  Thayer 1996, p. 141. 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, pp. 184–185. 
    ^  Hanford Cultural and Historic Resources Program 2002, pp. 2–4.15-2-4.18 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, pp. 204–205. 
    ^  Jones 1985, pp. 214–216. 
    ^  Jones 1985, p. 212. 
    ^  Thayer 1996, p. 11. 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, pp. 219–222. 
    ^  Hoddeson et al. 1993, pp. 226–229 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, pp. 250–252. 
    ^  Hoddeson et al. 1993, pp. 242–244 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, pp. 312–313. 
    ^  Hoddeson et al. 1993, pp. 129–130 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, p. 246. 
    ^  Hoddeson et al. 1993, pp. 130–131 
    ^  Hoddeson et al. 1993, pp. 245–248 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, p. 311. 
    ^  Hoddeson et al. 1993, p. 245 
    ^ a b  Hoddeson et al. 1993, pp. 294–296 
    ^  Hoddeson et al. 1993, p. 299 
    ^ a b c  Hansen 1995b, p. V-123. 
    ^  Hoddeson et al. 1993, pp. 301–307 
    ^  Hoddeson et al. 1993, pp. 148–154 
    ^  Hawkins, Truslow & Smith 1961, p. 203. 
    ^  Hansen 1995a, p. I-298. 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, p. 235. 
    ^  Gilbert 1969, pp. 3–4. 
    ^  Hoddeson et al. 1993, pp. 308–310 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, pp. 244–245. 
    ^  Baker, Hecker & Harbur 1983, pp. 144–145 
    ^  Hoddeson et al. 1993, p. 288 
    ^  Hoddeson et al. 1993, p. 290 
    ^  Hoddeson et al. 1993, pp. 330–331 
    ^  Jones 1985, p. 465. 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, pp. 318–319. 
    ^  Jones 1985, pp. 478–481. 
    ^  Hoddeson et al. 1993, pp. 174–175 
    ^  Hoddeson et al. 1993, pp. 365–367 
    ^ a b  Jones 1985, p. 512. 
    ^  Hoddeson et al. 1993, pp. 360–362 
    ^  Hoddeson et al. 1993, pp. 367–370 
    ^  Hoddeson et al. 1993, pp. 372–374 
    ^  Jones 1985, pp. 514–517. 
    ^ a b  Jungk 1958, p. 201. 
    ^  "Bhagavad Gita As It Is, 11: The Universal Form, Text 12". A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada. Retrieved 19 July  2013 .  
    ^ a b  "J. Robert Oppenheimer on the Trinity test (1965)". Atomic Archive. Retrieved 23 May  2008 .  
    ^  "Chapter 11. The Universal Form, text 32". Bhagavad As It Is. Retrieved 24 October  2012 .  
    ^  "The Eternal Apprentice". Time. 8 November 1948. Retrieved 6 March  2011 .  
    ^  Hijiya 2000, pp. 123–124. 
    ^  Jones 1985, p. 344. 
    ^  Jones 1985, p. 353. 
    ^  Jones 1985, pp. 349–350. 
    ^  Ulam 1976, pp. 143–144. 
    ^  Jones 1985, p. 350. 
    ^  Jones 1985, p. 358. 
    ^  Jones 1985, p. 361. 
    ^  Nichols 1987, p. 123. 
    ^  Jones 1985, p. 410. 
    ^  Jones 1985, p. 430. 
    ^  Wickware, Francis Sill (20 August 1945). "Manhattan Project: Its Scientists Have Harnessed Nature's Basic Force". Life. p. 91. Retrieved 25 November  2011 .  
    ^ a b  "Mystery Town Cradled Bomb: 75,000 in Oak Ridge, Tenn. Worked Hard and Wondered Long about Their Secret Job". Life. 20 August 1945. p. 94. Retrieved 25 November  2011 .  
    ^  "The Secret City/ Calutron operators at their panels, in the Y-12 plant at Oak Ridge, Tennessee, during World War II". The Atlantic. 25 June 2012. Retrieved 25 June  2012 .  
    ^ a b c  Wellerstein, Alex (16 April 2012). "Oak Ridge Confidential, or Baseball for Bombs". Restricted Data. Archived from the original on 17 January 2013. Retrieved 7 April  2013 .  
    ^ a b c  Wickware, Francis Sill (9 September 1946). "Oak Ridge". Life. p. 2. Retrieved 17 December  2014 .  
    ^ a b  Warren, Cecil (7 August 1945). "Atomic Bomb Secrecy Related By Ex-Worker". The Miami News. pp. 1–A.  
    ^  Sweeney 2001, pp. 196–198. 
    ^  Holloway 1994, pp. 76–79. 
    ^  Jones 1985, pp. 253–255. 
    ^  Sweeney 2001, pp. 198–200. 
    ^ a b  "No News Leaked Out About Bomb". Lawrence Journal-World. Associated Press. 8 August 1945. p. 5. Retrieved 15 April  2012 .  
    ^  Jones 1985, pp. 263–264. 
    ^  Jones 1985, p. 267. 
    ^  Jones 1985, pp. 258–260. 
    ^  Jones 1985, pp. 261–265. 
    ^  Groves 1962, pp. 142–145. 
    ^  Hewlett & Duncan 1969, pp. 312–314. 
    ^  Hewlett & Duncan 1969, p. 472. 
    ^  Broad, William J. (12 November 2007). "A Spy's Path: Iowa to A-Bomb to Kremlin Honor". The New York Times. pp. 1–2. Retrieved 2 July  2011 .  
    ^  Holloway 1994, pp. 222–223. 
    ^  Groves 1962, pp. 191–192. 
    ^  Groves 1962, pp. 187–190. 
    ^  Jones 1985, p. 281. 
    ^  Groves 1962, p. 191. 
    ^  Jones 1985, p. 282. 
    ^  Groves 1962, pp. 194–196. 
    ^  Groves 1962, pp. 200–206. 
    ^  Jones 1985, pp. 283–285. 
    ^  Jones 1985, pp. 286–288. 
    ^  Groves 1962, p. 237. 
    ^  Jones 1985, pp. 289–290. 
    ^  Goudsmit 1947, pp. 174–176. 
    ^  Groves 1962, pp. 333–340. 
    ^  Hoddeson et al. 1993, pp. 380–381 
    ^ a b  Groves 1962, pp. 253–255. 
    ^  Hoddeson et al. 1993, pp. 379–380 
    ^  Groves 1962, p. 184. 
    ^  Groves 1962, pp. 259–262. 
    ^  Hoddeson et al. 1993, pp. 386–388 
    ^  Groves 1962, p. 311. 
    ^  Campbell 2005, pp. 39–40. 
    ^  Groves 1962, p. 341. 
    ^  Groves 1962, pp. 268–276. 
    ^  Groves 1962, p. 308. 
    ^  Jones 1985, pp. 530–532. 
    ^  Holloway 1994, pp. 116–117. 
    ^  "Potsdam and the Final Decision to Use the Bomb". The Manhattan Project: An Interactive History. US Department of Energy, Office of History and Heritage Resources. Archived from the original on 22 November 2010. Retrieved 19 December  2010 .  
    ^  Groves 1962, pp. 315–319. 
    ^  Hoddeson et al. 1993, pp. 392–393 
    ^  "U.S. Strategic Bombing Survey: The Effects of the Atomic Bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki" (PDF) . Harry S. Truman Presidential Library and Museum. 19 June 1946: 9, 36. Retrieved 15 March  2009 .  
    ^  Buttry, Daniel. "Life Arises from Hiroshima: Legacy of slavery still haunts Japan". Our Values. Retrieved 15 June  2016 .  
    ^  "Hiroshima and Nagasaki Bombing – Facts about the Atomic Bomb". Hiroshimacommittee.org. Retrieved 11 August  2013 .  
    ^  Nuke-Rebuke: Writers & Artists Against Nuclear Energy & Weapons (The Contemporary anthology series). The Spirit That Moves Us Press. 1 May 1984. pp. 22–29.  
    ^  Groves 1962, pp. 343–346. 
    ^ a b  Hoddeson et al. 1993, pp. 396–397 
    ^ a b  "The Atomic Bomb and the End of World War II, A Collection of Primary Sources" (PDF) . National Security Archive Electronic Briefing Book No. 162. George Washington University. 13 August 1945.  
    ^  "Lawrence Litz's Interview (2012)". Manhattan Project Voices. Retrieved 27 February  2015 .  
    ^  Wellerstein, Alex (16 August 2013). "The Third Core's Revenge". Restricted Data. Retrieved 27 February  2015 .  
    ^ a b  Bernstein, Barton J. (Spring 1991). "Eclipsed by Hiroshima and Nagasaki: Early Thinking about Tactical Nuclear Weapons". International Security. 15 (4): 149–173. ISSN 0162-2889. JSTOR 2539014.  
    ^  Ahnfeldt 1966, pp. 886–889. 
    ^  Home & Low 1993, p. 537. 
    ^  Frisch 1970, pp. 107–115. 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, pp. 399–400. 
    ^  "Petition to the President of the United States, 17 July 1945. Miscellaneous Historical Documents Collection". Harry S. Truman Presidential Library and Museum. Retrieved 20 October  2012 .  
    ^  Groves 1962, pp. 348–362. 
    ^  Nichols 1987, p. 226. 
    ^ a b  Jones 1985, pp. 592–593. 
    ^  Hansen 1995b, p. V-152. 
    ^ a b  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, p. 625. 
    ^  Nichols 1987, pp. 225–226. 
    ^  Nichols 1987, pp. 216–217. 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, p. 624. 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, pp. 630, 646 
    ^  Nichols 1987, p. 234. 
    ^  Jones 1985, p. 594. 
    ^  Grodzins & Rabinowitch 1963, p. vii. 
    ^  Gosling 1994, pp. 55–57. 
    ^  Groves 1962, pp. 394–398. 
    ^  Jones 1985, p. 600. 
    ^ a b  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, pp. 723–724. 
    ^  Nichols 1987, pp. 34–35. 
    ^  "Atomic Bomb Seen as Cheap at Price". Edmonton Journal. 7 August 1945. p. 1. Retrieved 1 January  2012 .  
    ^  O'Brien 2015, pp. 47–48. 
    ^  Laurence, William L. (26 September 1945). "Drama of the Atomic Bomb Found Climax in July 16 Test". The New York Times. Retrieved 1 October  2012 .  
    ^  Sweeney 2001, pp. 204–205. 
    ^  Holloway 1994, pp. 59–60. 
    ^  "The Community LOOW Project: A Review of Environmental Investigations and Remediation at the Former Lake Ontario Ordnance Works" (PDF) . King Groundwater Science, Inc. September 2008.  
    ^  "Niagara Falls Storage Site, New York" (PDF) . U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 31 August 2011. Archived from the original (PDF)  on 23 February 2017.  
    ^  Jenks, Andrew (July 2002). "Model City USA: The Environmental Cost of Victory in World War II and the Cold War". Environmental History. 12 (77): 552.  
    ^  DePalma, Anthony (10 March 2004). "A Toxic Waste Capital Looks to Spread it Around; Upstate Dump is the Last in the Northeast". The New York Times.  
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, pp. 633–637. 
    ^  Weinberg 1961, p. 161. 
    ^  Hewlett & Duncan 1969, pp. 74–76. 
    ^  Hewlett & Duncan 1969, pp. 72–74. 
    ^  Hewlett & Duncan 1969, pp. 490–493, 514–515 
    ^  Hewlett & Duncan 1969, pp. 252–253. 
    ^  Hewlett & Anderson 1962, p. 655. 
    ^  "Manhattan Project National Historical Park". United States Department of Energy. Retrieved 2 August  2015 .  
    ^  "Manhattan Project National Historical Park". Department of Energy. Retrieved 10 November  2015 .  

Notes 2

    ^  Oppenheimer spoke these words in the television documentary The Decision to Drop the Bomb (1965).[227] Oppenheimer read the original text in Sanskrit, "kālo'smi lokakṣayakṛtpravṛddho lokānsamāhartumiha pravṛttaḥ" (XI,32),[228] which he translated as "I am become Death, the destroyer of worlds". In the literature, the quote usually appears in the form shatterer of worlds, because this was the form in which it first appeared in print, in Time magazine on November 8, 1948.[229] It later appeared in Robert Jungk's Brighter than a Thousand Suns: A Personal History of the Atomic Scientists (1958),[225] which was based on an interview with Oppenheimer. See Hijiya, The Gita of Robert Oppenheimer[230] 

References   General, administrative, and diplomatic histories 

    Bernstein, Barton J. (June 1976). "The Uneasy Alliance: Roosevelt, Churchill, and the Atomic Bomb, 1940–1945". The Western Political Quarterly. University of Utah. 29 (2): 202–230. doi:10.2307/448105. JSTOR 448105. 
    Campbell, Richard H. (2005). The Silverplate Bombers: A History and Registry of the Enola Gay and Other B-29s Configured to Carry Atomic Bombs. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland & Company. ISBN 0-7864-2139-8. OCLC 58554961. 
    Fine, Lenore; Remington, Jesse A. (1972). The Corps of Engineers: Construction in the United States (PDF) . Washington, D.C.: United States Army Center of Military History. OCLC 834187. Retrieved 25 August  2013 . 
    Freeman Lindsey A. (2015). Longing for the Bomb: Oak Ridge and Atomic Nostalgia. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press.
    Frisch, David H. (June 1970). "Scientists and the Decision to Bomb Japan". Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. Educational Foundation for Nuclear Science. 26 (6): 107–115. ISSN 0096-3402. 
    Gilbert, Keith V. (1969). History of the Dayton Project (PDF) . Miamisburg, Ohio: Mound Laboratory, Atomic Energy Commission. OCLC 650540359. Retrieved 31 October  2014 . 
    Gosling, Francis George (1994). The Manhattan Project: Making the Atomic Bomb. Washington, DC: United States Department of Energy, History Division. OCLC 637052193. 
    Gowing, Margaret (1964). Britain and Atomic Energy, 1935–1945. London: Macmillan Publishing. OCLC 3195209. 
    Grodzins, Morton; Rabinowitch, Eugene, eds. (1963). The Atomic Age: Scientists in National and World Affairs. New York: Basic Book Publishing. OCLC 15058256. 
    Hewlett, Richard G.; Anderson, Oscar E. (1962). The New World, 1939–1946 (PDF) . University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press. ISBN 0-520-07186-7. OCLC 637004643. Retrieved 26 March  2013 . 
    Hewlett, Richard G.; Duncan, Francis (1969). Atomic Shield, 1947–1952. A History of the United States Atomic Energy Commission. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press. ISBN 0-520-07187-5. OCLC 3717478. 
    Hijiya, James A. (June 2000). "The Gita of Robert Oppenheimer" (PDF) . Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society. 144 (2). Archived from the original (PDF)  on 15 May 2013. Retrieved 16 December  2013 . 
    Holl, Jack M.; Hewlett, Richard G.; Harris, Ruth R. (1997). Argonne National Laboratory, 1946–96. University of Illinois Press. ISBN 978-0-252-02341-5. 
    Holloway, David (1994). Stalin and the Bomb: The Soviet Union and Atomic Energy, 1939–1956. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press. ISBN 0-300-06056-4. OCLC 29911222. 
    Howes, Ruth H.; Herzenberg, Caroline L. (1999). Their Day in the Sun: Women of the Manhattan Project. Philadelphia: Temple University Press. ISBN 1-56639-719-7. OCLC 49569088. 
    Hunner, Jon (2004). Inventing Los Alamos: The Growth of an Atomic Community. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press. ISBN 978-0-8061-3891-6. OCLC 154690200. 
    Johnson, Charles; Jackson, Charles (1981). City Behind a Fence: Oak Ridge, Tennessee, 1942–1946. Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press. ISBN 0-87049-303-5. OCLC 6331350. 
    Jones, Vincent (1985). Manhattan: The Army and the Atomic Bomb (PDF) . Washington, D.C.: United States Army Center of Military History. OCLC 10913875. Retrieved 25 August  2013 . 
    Jungk, Robert (1958). Brighter than a Thousand Suns: A Personal History of the Atomic Scientists. New York: Harcourt Brace. ISBN 0-15-614150-7. OCLC 181321. 
    O'Brien, Phillips Payson (2015). How the War was Won. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-107-01475-6. OCLC 907550561. 
    Phelps, Stephen (2010). The Tizard Mission: the Top-Secret Operation that Changed the Course of World War II. Yardley, Pennsylvania: Westholme. ISBN 978-1-59416-116-2. OCLC 642846903. 
    Rhodes, Richard (1986). The Making of the Atomic Bomb. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-671-44133-7. OCLC 13793436. 
    Stacey, C. P. (1970). Arms, Men and Government: The War Policies of Canada, 1939 – 1945 (PDF) . The Queen's Printer by authority of the Minister of National Defence. OCLC 610317261. 
    Sweeney, Michael S. (2001). Secrets of Victory: The Office of Censorship and the American Press and Radio in World War II. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 0-8078-2598-0. 
    Villa, Brian L. (1981). "Chapter 11: Alliance Politics and Atomic Collaboration, 1941–1943". In Sidney, Aster (ed.). The Second World War as a National Experience: Canada. The Canadian Committee for the History of the Second World War, Department of National Defence. OCLC 11646807. Retrieved 8 December  2014 . 
    Williams, Mary H. (1960). Chronology 1941–1945. Washington, D.C.: Office of the Chief of Military History, Department of the Army. OCLC 1358166. 

Technical histories 

    Ahnfeldt, Arnold Lorentz, ed. (1966). Radiology in World War II. Washington, D.C.: Office of the Surgeon General, Department of the Army. OCLC 630225. 
    Baker, Richard D.; Hecker, Siegfried S.; Harbur, Delbert R. (1983). "Plutonium: A Wartime Nightmare but a Metallurgist's Dream" (PDF) . Los Alamos Science (Winter/Spring): 142–151. Retrieved 22 November  2010 . 
    Ermenc, Joseph J., ed. (1989). Atomic Bomb Scientists: Memoirs, 1939–1945. Westport, Connecticut and London: Meckler. ISBN 978-0-88736-267-5.  (1967 interview with Groves)
    Hanford Cultural and Historic Resources Program, U.S. Department of Energy (2002). History of the Plutonium Production Facilities, 1943–1990. Richland, Washington: Hanford Site Historic District. OCLC 52282810. 
    Hansen, Chuck (1995a). Volume I: The Development of US Nuclear Weapons. Swords of Armageddon: US Nuclear Weapons Development since 1945. Sunnyvale, California: Chukelea Publications. ISBN 978-0-9791915-1-0. OCLC 231585284. 
    Hansen, Chuck (1995b). Volume V: US Nuclear Weapons Histories. Swords of Armageddon: US Nuclear Weapons Development since 1945. Sunnyvale, California: Chukelea Publications. ISBN 978-0-9791915-0-3. OCLC 231585284. 
    Hawkins, David; Truslow, Edith C.; Smith, Ralph Carlisle (1961). Manhattan District history, Project Y, the Los Alamos story, Vol. 1. Los Angeles: Tomash Publishers. doi:10.2172/1087644. ISBN 978-0-938228-08-0. OSTI 1087644. Originally published as Los Alamos Report LAMS-2532 
    Hawkins, David; Truslow, Edith C.; Smith, Ralph Carlisle (1961). Manhattan District history, Project Y, the Los Alamos story, Vol. 2. Los Angeles: Tomash Publishers. doi:10.2172/1087645. ISBN 978-0-938228-08-0. OSTI 1087645. Originally published as Los Alamos Report LAMS-2532 
    Hoddeson, Lillian; Henriksen, Paul W.; Meade, Roger A.; Westfall, Catherine L. (1993). Critical Assembly: A Technical History of Los Alamos During the Oppenheimer Years, 1943–1945. New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-44132-2. OCLC 26764320. 
    Home, R. W.; Low, Morris F. (September 1993). "Postwar Scientific Intelligence Missions to Japan". Isis. 84 (3): 527–537. doi:10.1086/356550. JSTOR 235645. 
    Ruhoff, John; Fain, Pat (June 1962). "The First Fifty Critical days". Mallinckrodt Uranium Division News. 7 (3 and 4). Archived from the original on 30 March 2015. Retrieved 30 October  2010 . 
    Serber, Robert; Rhodes, Richard (1992). The Los Alamos Primer: The First Lectures on How to Build an Atomic Bomb. Berkeley: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-07576-4. OCLC 23693470.  (Available on Wikimedia Commons)
    Smyth, Henry DeWolf (1945). Atomic Energy for Military Purposes: the Official Report on the Development of the Atomic Bomb under the Auspices of the United States Government, 1940–1945. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. OCLC 770285. 
    Thayer, Harry (1996). Management of the Hanford Engineer Works In World War II: How the Corps, DuPont and the Metallurgical Laboratory Fast Tracked the Original Plutonium Works. New York: American Society of Civil Engineers Press. ISBN 978-0-7844-0160-6. OCLC 34323402. 
    Waltham, Chris (20 June 2002). An Early History of Heavy Water. Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of British Columbia. arXiv:physics/0206076 . Bibcode:2002physics...6076W. 
    Weinberg, Alvin M. (21 July 1961). "Impact of Large-Scale Science on the United States". Science, New Series. 134 (3473): 161–164. Bibcode:1961Sci...134..161W. doi:10.1126/science.134.3473.161. JSTOR 1708292. PMID 17818712. 

Participant accounts 

    Bethe, Hans A. (1991). The Road from Los Alamos. New York: Simon and Schuster. ISBN 0-671-74012-1. OCLC 22661282. 
    Compton, Arthur (1956). Atomic Quest. New York: Oxford University Press. OCLC 173307. 
    Goudsmit, Samuel A. (1947). Alsos. New York: Henry Schuman. ISBN 0-938228-09-9. OCLC 8805725. 
    Groves, Leslie (1962). Now it Can be Told: The Story of the Manhattan Project. New York: Harper & Row. ISBN 0-306-70738-1. OCLC 537684. 
    Libby, Leona Marshall (1979). Uranium People. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. ISBN 0-684-16242-3. OCLC 4665032. 
    Nichols, Kenneth David (1987). The Road to Trinity: A Personal Account of How America's Nuclear Policies Were Made. New York: William Morrow and Company. ISBN 0-688-06910-X. OCLC 15223648. 
    Ulam, Stanislaw (1976). Adventures of a Mathematician. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. ISBN 0-520-07154-9. OCLC 1528346. 

External links 

    "The Atomic Bomb and the End of World War II, A Collection of Primary Sources". George Washington University. Retrieved 27 July  2011 . 
    "Atomic Heritage Foundation". Atomic Heritage Foundation. Retrieved 27 July  2011 . 
    "Voices of the Manhattan Project". Atomic Heritage Foundation. Retrieved 10 February  2015 .  Features hundreds of audio/visual interviews with Manhattan Project veterans.
    "History Center: Los Alamos National Laboratory". Los Alamos National Laboratory. Retrieved 27 July  2011 . 
    "ORNL: The first 50 Years: History of ORNL". ORNL Review. 25 (3). Archived from the original on 2 June 2016. Retrieved 13 October  2015 . 

    v
    t
    e

Manhattan Project
Timeline
Sites

    Ames
    Berkeley
    Chicago
    Dayton
    Hanford
    Inyokern
    Los Alamos
    Montreal
    New York
    Oak Ridge
    Trinity
    Wendover
    Heavy water sites

[Image: The rising mushroom cloud from the Nagasaki "Fat Man" bomb, August 9, 1945]  
Administrators

    Vannevar Bush
    Arthur Compton
    James B. Conant
    Priscilla Duffield
    Thomas Farrell
    Leslie Groves
    John Lansdale
    Ernest Lawrence
    James Marshall
    Franklin Matthias
    Dorothy McKibbin
    Kenneth Nichols
    Robert Oppenheimer
    Deak Parsons
    William Purnell
    Frank Spedding
    Charles Thomas
    Paul Tibbets
    Bud Uanna
    Harold Urey
    Stafford Warren
    Ed Westcott
    Roscoe Wilson

Scientists

    Luis Alvarez
    Robert Bacher
    Hans Bethe
    Aage Bohr
    Niels Bohr
    Norris Bradbury
    James Chadwick
    John Cockcroft
    Harry Daghlian
    Enrico Fermi
    Richard Feynman
    Val Fitch
    James Franck
    Klaus Fuchs
    Maria Goeppert Mayer
    George Kistiakowsky
    George Koval
    Willard Libby
    Edwin McMillan
    Mark Oliphant
    Norman Ramsey
    Isidor Isaac Rabi
    James Rainwater
    Bruno Rossi
    Glenn Seaborg
    Emilio Segrè
    Louis Slotin
    Henry DeWolf Smyth
    Leo Szilard
    Edward Teller
    Stanisław Ulam
    John von Neumann
    John Wheeler
    Eugene Wigner
    Robert Wilson
    Leona Woods

Operations

    Alsos Mission
    Bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki
    Operation Crossroads
    Operation Peppermint
    Project Alberta
    Silverplate
    509th Composite Group
    Enola Gay
    Bockscar
    The Great Artiste

Weapons

    Fat Man
    Little Boy
    Pumpkin bomb
    Thin Man

Related topics

    Atomic Energy Act of 1946
    British contribution
    Chicago Pile-1
    Demon core
    Einstein–Szilárd letter
    Interim Committee
    Oppenheimer security hearing
    Plutonium
    Quebec Agreement
    RaLa Experiment
    S-1 Executive Committee
    S-50 Project
    Smyth Report
    Uranium
    X-10 Graphite Reactor

[Image: Category]   Manhattan Project

    v
    t
    e

World War II

    Outline
    Military engagements
        Battles
        Operations
    Commanders
    Casualties
    Conferences

General
Topics

    Air warfare of World War II
        In Europe
    Blitzkrieg
    Comparative military ranks
    Cryptography
    Declarations of war
    Diplomacy
    Home front
        United States
        Australian
        United Kingdom
    Lend-Lease
    Manhattan Project
    Military awards
    Military equipment
    Military production
    Naval history
    Nazi plunder
    Opposition
    Technology
        Allied cooperation
    Total war
    Strategic bombing
    Puppet states
    Women
    Art and World War II

Theaters

    Asia and Pacific
        China
        South-East Asia
        North and Central Pacific
        South-West Pacific
    Europe
        Western Front
        Eastern Front
    Mediterranean and Middle East
        North Africa
        East Africa
        Italy
    West Africa
    Atlantic
    North America
    South America

Aftermath

    Expulsion of Germans
    Paperclip
    Osoaviakhim
    Keelhaul
    Occupation of Germany
    Territorial changes of Germany
    Soviet occupations
        Romania
        Poland
        Hungary
        Baltic
    Occupation of Japan
    First Indochina War
    Indonesian National Revolution
    Chinese Civil War
    Division of Korea
    Cold War
    Decolonization
    Treaty on the Final Settlement with Respect to Germany

War crimes

    Allied war crimes
        Soviet war crimes
        British war crimes
        United States war crimes
    German war crimes
        forced labour
        Wehrmacht war crimes
        The Holocaust
            Aftermath
        Response
        Nuremberg trials
    Italian war crimes
    Japanese war crimes
        Unit 731
        Prosecution
    Croatian war crimes
        Persecution of Serbs
        Persecution of Jews
    Romanian war crimes
    Sexual violence
        German military brothels
        Camp brothels
        Rape during the occupation of Japan
            Sook Ching
            Comfort women
        Rape of Nanking
        Rape of Manila
        Rape during the occupation of Germany
        Rape during the liberation of France
        Rape during the Soviet occupation of Poland

Participants
Allies

    Australia
    Belgium
    Brazil
    Canada
    China
    Cuba
    Czechoslovakia
    Denmark
    Ethiopia
    France
    Free France
    Greece
    India
    Italy (from September 1943)
    Luxembourg
    Mexico
    Netherlands
    New Zealand
    Norway
    Philippines
    Poland
    South Africa
    Southern Rhodesia
    Soviet Union
    Tuva
    United Kingdom
    United States
        Puerto Rico
    Yugoslavia

Axis

    Albania
    Bulgaria
    China
    Croatia
    Finland
    Germany
    Hungary
    Free India
    Iraq
    Italy (until September 1943
    Italian Social Republic
    Japan
    Manchukuo
    Philippines
    Romania
    Slovakia
    Thailand
    Vichy France

Resistance

    Albania
    Austria
    Belgium
    Bulgaria
    Czech lands
    Denmark
    Estonia
    Ethiopia
    France
    Germany
    Greece
    Hong Kong
    Italy
    Japan
    Jews
    Korea
    Latvia
    Lithuania
    Luxembourg
    Malaya
    Netherlands
    Northeast China
    Norway
    Philippines
    Poland
    Romania
    Thailand
    Soviet Union
    Slovakia
    Western Ukraine
    Vietnam
    Yugoslavia

POWs

    Finnish prisoners in the Soviet Union
    German prisoners in the Soviet Union
    German prisoners in the United States
    Italian prisoners in the Soviet Union
    Japanese prisoners
        In the Soviet Union
    Soviet prisoner mistreatment by Germans
    Polish prisoners in the Soviet Union
    Romanian prisoners in the Soviet Union
    Soviet prisoners in Finland

Timeline
Prelude

    Africa
    Asia
    Europe

1939

    Poland
    Phoney War
    Winter War
    Atlantic
    Changsha
    China

1940

    Weserübung
    Netherlands
    Belgium
    France
        Armistice of 22 June 1940
    Britain
    North Africa
    West Africa
    British Somaliland
    North China
    Baltic States
    Moldova
    Indochina
    Greece
    Compass

1941

    East Africa
    Yugoslavia
    Shanggao
    Greece
    Crete
    Iraq
    Soviet Union
    Finland
    Lithuania
    Syria and Lebanon
    Kiev
    Iran
    Leningrad
    Gorky
    Moscow
    Sevastopol
    Pearl Harbor
    Hong Kong
    Philippines
    Changsha
    Malaya
    Borneo (1941–1942)
    Greek famine of 1941–1944

1942

    Burma
    Changsha
    Java Sea
    Coral Sea
    Gazala
    Dutch Harbor
    Attu (occupation)
    Kiska
    Zhejiang-Jiangxi
    Midway
    Rzhev
    Blue
    Stalingrad
    Singapore
    Dieppe
    El Alamein
    Guadalcanal
    Torch
    Chinese famine of 1942–1943

1943

    Tunisia
    Kursk
    Smolensk
    Gorky
    Solomon Islands
    Attu
    Sicily
    Cottage
    Lower Dnieper
    Italy
        Armistice of Cassibile
    Gilbert and Marshall Islands
    Burma
    Northern Burma and Western Yunnan
    Changde
    Bengal famine of 1943
    Ruzagayura famine of 1943–1944

1944

    Monte Cassino / Shingle
    Narva
    Korsun–Cherkassy
    Tempest
    Ichi-Go
    Overlord
    Neptune
    Normandy
    Mariana and Palau
    Bagration
    Western Ukraine
    Tannenberg Line
    Warsaw
    Eastern Romania
    Belgrade
    Paris
    Dragoon
    Gothic Line
    Market Garden
    Estonia
    Crossbow
    Pointblank
    Lapland
    Hungary
    Leyte
    Ardennes
        Bodenplatte
    Philippines (1944–1945)
    Burma (1944–1945)
    Dutch famine of 1944–1945

1945

    Vistula–Oder
    Iwo Jima
    Western invasion of Germany
    Okinawa
    Italy (Spring 1945)
    Borneo
    Syrmian Front
    Berlin
    Czechoslovakia
    Budapest
    West Hunan
    Guangxi
    Surrender of Germany
    Project Hula
    Manchuria
    Manila
    Borneo
    Taipei
    Atomic bombings
        Debate
    Kuril Islands
        Shumshu
    Vietnamese famine of 1945
    Surrender of Japan
        End of World War II in Asia

    Bibliography
    Category
    Index
    Portal

    v
    t
    e

New Mexico during World War II
People

    Jack Aeby
    Jerry C. Begay
    John J. Dempsey
    Thomas Farrell
    Enrico Fermi
    Leslie Groves
    John E. Miles
    Chester Nez
    Lloyd Oliver
    Willard Varnell Oliver
    J. Robert Oppenheimer
    Merril Sandoval
    Emilio G. Segrè
    Frank Tsosie Thompson

[Image: Trinity - Explosion 15s.jpg]  
Military installations

    Alamogordo Army Airfield
    Camp Lordsburg
    Clovis Army Airfield
    Carlsbad Army Airfield
    Deming Army Airfield
    Fort Stanton
    Fort Sumner Army Aifield
    Hobbs Army Airfield
    Kirtland Field
    Los Alamos National Laboratory
    Roswell Army Airfield
    White Sands Proving Ground

See also

    200th Coast Artillery
    American Theater
    Arizona during World War II
    Bat bomb
    Code talker
    Escape from Fort Stanton
    Lordsburg Killings
    Manhattan Project
    Military history of the United States during World War II
    Nevada during World War II
    New Mexico World War II Army Airfields
    Santa Fe Riot
    Trinity

Portals 
Access related topics 

    [Image: Heinkel He 111 during the Battle of Britain.jpg]   World War II portal 
    [Image: Radioactive.svg]   Nuclear technology portal 
    [Image: Papapishu-Lab-icon-6.svg]   Chemistry portal 
    [Image: Stylised atom with three Bohr model orbits and stylised nucleus.svg]   Physics portal 
    [Image: Newton's reflecting telescope.jpg]   History of science portal 
    [Image: Terra.png]   International relations portal 
    [Image: Operation Castle - Romeo 001.jpg]   Weapons of mass destruction portal 
    [Image: Flag of Canada.svg]   Canada portal 
    [Image: Flag of New Mexico.svg]   New Mexico portal 
    [Image: Flag of Tennessee.svg]   Tennessee portal 
    [Image: Flag of Washington.svg]   Washington portal 
    [Image: Flag of the United Kingdom.svg]   United Kingdom portal 

Find out more on Wikipedia's 
Sister projects 

     Media
    from Commons 
     Textbooks
    from Wikibooks 
     Quotations
    from Wikiquote 


Authority control [Image: Edit this at Wikidata]  

    GND: 4278070-6  
    ISNI: 0000 0001 2242 7230  
    LCCN: n88074979  
    NKC: kn20070212001  
    NLA: 35354474  
    VIAF: 124438256  
    WorldCat Identities (via VIAF): 124438256 

Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Manhattan_Project&oldid=908646983"
Categories:

    Manhattan Project
    Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki
    Code names
    Explosives engineering
    History of the Manhattan Project
    Military history of Canada during World War II
    Military history of the United Kingdom during World War II
    Military history of the United States during World War II
    Military projects
    Nuclear history of the United States
    Nuclear weapons of the United States
    Nuclear weapons program of the United States
    Secret military programs
    1942 establishments in the United States
    1946 disestablishments in the United States
    Projects established in 1942

Hidden categories:

    Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism
    Use dmy dates from October 2012
    Featured articles
    Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with ISNI identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with NKC identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with NLA identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with WorldCat-VIAF identifiers

Navigation menu
Personal tools

    Not logged in
    Talk
    Contributions
    Create account
    Log in

Namespaces

    Article 
    Talk 

Variants 

Views

    Read 
    View source 
    View history 

More 

Search
Navigation

    Main page
    Contents
    Featured content
    Current events
    Random article
    Donate to Wikipedia
    Wikipedia store

Interaction

    Help
    About Wikipedia
    Community portal
    Recent changes
    Contact page

Tools

    What links here
    Related changes
    Upload file
    Special pages
    Permanent link
    Page information
    Wikidata item
    Cite this page

In other projects

    Wikimedia Commons
    Wikiquote

Print/export

    Create a book
    Download as PDF
    Printable version

Languages

    العربية
    Asturianu
    Azərbaycanca
    বাংলা
    Беларуская
    Български
    Bosanski
    Brezhoneg
    Català
    Čeština
    Cymraeg
    Dansk
    Deutsch
    Eesti
    Ελληνικά
    Español
    Esperanto
    Euskara
    فارسی
    Français
    Gaeilge
    Galego
    한국어
    Հայերեն
    हिन्दी
    Hrvatski
    Bahasa Indonesia
    Íslenska
    Italiano
    עברית
    ქართული
    Қазақша
    Latina
    Latviešu
    Lietuvių
    Magyar
    Македонски
    മലയാളം
    मराठी
    مازِرونی
    Bahasa Melayu
    Nederlands
    日本語
    Norsk
    Norsk nynorsk
    Occitan
    ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
    پنجابی
    ភាសាខ្មែរ
    Polski
    Português
    Rom'nă
    Русский
    Саха тыла
    Scots
    Simple English
    Slovenčina
    Slovenščina
    Српски / srpski
    Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
    Suomi
    Svenska
    தமிழ்
    Татарча/tatarça
    ไทย
    Türkçe
    Українська
    Tiếng Việt
    吴语
    Yorùbá
    粵語
    中文

Edit links 

    This page was last edited on 31 July 2019, at 02:11 (UTC) .
    Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

    Privacy policy
    About Wikipedia
    Disclaimers
    Contact Wikipedia
    Developers
    Cookie statement
    Mobile view

    [Image: Wikimedia Foundation]  	
    [Image: Powered by MediaWiki]  	



Textise: Back to top
This text-only page was created by Textise (www.textise.net) © Textise - CPC LLC
To find out more about our product, visit Textise.org.


-------------------------------------------------


Hello, everyone! This is one of the weirdest sites: or your money back! We have ZIM, neopets, music, and much, much, more. E-mail us for questions, comments, complaints and information. Why not click on the Very Weird Stuff link to see more, or click on the music link? We have halloween and christmas pictures on the NeoPics link. Cheese is not a wild thing!!!!!!!!! Now I have decided to go for a world record. I will try to make the longest web page ever, made completely out of text! Won't that be fun? I will just type, and type, and never, ever use copy and paste. Wow...I really must be bored. Just goes to show what boredom can do to you. Any way, that's it for now. Wait, no it isn't, I still have to keep going, and going, and going. Because I do. THE REST OF THE STUFF I TYPE WILL BE COMPLETLY IN CAPS JUST BECAUSE I CAN. THAT IS ALL. SEEYA! Hi, I'm back. So far this is nowhere near the world record. I think. I don't exactly know where it is...oh, well. I'll just have to do the very best that I can. No one is really coming here, anyway. So it doesn't matter. By the way, TAB is a worthwhile, community-service organization. The form link is to a 100% fake TAB registration form that you can fill out just for laughs. I can't believe I'm bothering to do this. I have very low expectations of my site. None ever comes here, I could do this all day long and I still wouldn't have any more hits. This is just a pointless excursive in spelling errors and grammatical imprecision. May your day be shiney! The following is an extremely weird poem-thingy that I wrote when I was in a relatively weird mood:
never mind that noise my dear can anyone pass the cheese only if you say pretty please oh, boy do I have to sneeze. why must everyone always rhyme, why I’m a poet and don’t I know it? what I fear comes right after here not this life or the next will I ever be able to pass the test? we’re stuck in here, (alone my dear) and we’ll problem never get out so don’t start to shout. it’s dark and I want to go home is where the heart was where is it now? we’ll never know but oh crap it’s starting to snow and it’s time to show and tell about the well that you found last summer at camp when it was damp it was near the ramp oh god why must this be I liked that tree but now it’s gone, farewell so long I’ll miss you as long as you write but then I’m afraid to say good-night. my dear there’s nothing to fear that’s only a box that’s made of blocks next to the wagon that looks like a dragon why are you shaking it’s your fear that is making you shiver and act all a quiver. don’t you know that you only need be afraid of fear and never anything here and certainly not a post that acts like a ghost?
See, very weird. At least it fills up my word quota for the day. Not that I exactly have a word quota for the day. It just sounded very professional to say it. Anyway, I still don't think that anyone is actually coming here. You'd have to be an absolute loser (or really bored) to come here. I'd probley come here, but that isn't much of a surprise. After all, I've been to the Really Really Big Button That Doesn't Do Anything website over 50 times. Pathetic. But, whatever. As long as I'm happy, right. Humor the crazy person, okay? Oh, guess what? According to someone you problem don't know, this is the second most pointless website ever! Next to the Really Big Button, of course. I feel special. Come on everyone, group hug. Okay, now I'm starting to scare myself...I'm gonna quit for today. Seeya. Now I'm back. Is this getting confusing to you? Too bad. Now I want you to go to http://quiz.ravenblack.net/blood.pl?biter=eon" If you do this I'll get points in the game. Come on all you non-existing people! Help me! You know you want to! It's a worthy cause! Honestly, the more time I waste playing the game, the less time I'll work on this site and the less stuff you gotta read. Although why you'd be here if you didn't want to read is beyond me. Maybe you're lost. Okay, if you want to get out, click the little refresh button, okay? Good...what? You say it didn't let you out? Oh, well. You must be caught in a time warp. Keep pressing it. Maybe you'll break free. What's that. The little counter at the bottom keeps going up? Never mind. That's just how many times you have to click before you can leave. Good-bye.

Hey, I'm once again: back. I don't suppose you fell for that little thing about the refresh button. After all, you're a responsible, intelligent person who apparently has a lot of time on your hands. Well, you can't possibly have more time than I do. I mean, after all, I made this site. You're only browsing it. And most people don't even come here. Not even my friends...*sniffle* The just ignore this poor, pathetic little page. All they do is fill out the TAB form and leave. I think. Maybe they're here right now! HI! HOW ARE YOU DOING? I'M FINE! THANKS FOR COMING! YES, I'M YELLING! Who am I kidding. This page won't get a single hit, unless I bribe people...now that has possibilities. Okay, fill out the TAB form, so I have proof that you bothered to come here and...uh...I'll...uh...send you a sandwich? Please allow 6-8 weeks for delivery. I'm bored. I'm gonna go hug a moose. MOOSE! I love-d you moose! Hey, I'm back again! Yea...*waits for applause* okay! Now I want all you loyal fans...*cricket chirps* to go to the link to see what I'm like. I took a whole bunch of personality quizzes and posted them there. I'm an evil villain, kitty and a freakazoid so far. And I only took the quiz once, too. Spooky how accurate they are...anyway, I command you to go! I'm going. I'm back. I'm gonna start counting how many times I say back. Let's see: 1...2...3...4...5! Wow. I must really be desperate for something to do. I now officially have proof that someone has been here! It was one of my friends. Apparently this page really is getting long, because my friend said something to that effect. Maybe. Anyway, moving on! I'm just basically typing nothing. Just like all those reports people have to do. You know? With a specific number of words. They start out with half that number, and then just fill in words until they have the right amount. I salute those people. You're great tradition is being carried out here, on the second most pointless site ever! Well. Maybe eventually some weird, bored person will wander onto my site on accident and be mildly entertained be my site until they wander onto a live video feed of a coffee maker. Or maybe not. I only know that I'm entertaining me, which was my original goal. So. I've done what I've set out to accomplish. Yea, me! I'm so special. You see, most people, they don't like reading or writing. So if you're not most people, you've made it down this far without skipping, skimming or getting the spark notes version. (Which I think does not exist) My point is, if you've bothered to read this, then, (like me) you probley have also read the ketchup bottle so many times that you have it down verbatim. Look verbatim up. It's a word. But, you should know that, since you like reading. Or maybe you're just skimming. Anyway, there's nothing wrong with reading food labels. You might be asked a question about them on a quiz show. And now, for the million-dollar question: How many calories are there in a single serving of Mustard? I can just see it now...It could be called Know-Your-Food. Or You are What you Eat. It'd probley be as popular as those game shows that no one's ever heard of. Speaking of food, what's up with pie? There's strawberry pie, apple, pumpkin and so many others, but there is no grape pie! I know. I'm just as upset about this unfortunate lack of development in the pie division. Think about it. Grapes are used to make jelly, jam, juice and raisins. What makes them undesirable for pie? Would they dry into raisins? Couldn't you just stick some jelly in a piecrust and bake it? It just doesn't make any sense. Another thing that bothers me is organ grinders. You know, the foreign guys with the bellhop hats and the little music thingy and the cute little monkey with the bellhop hat who collects the money? Okay. They're basically begging on the street. How did they ever afford an organ-thingy? Wouldn't it make more sense to get a kazoo, if you're broke? And if they're so poor, what possessed them to buy a monkey? I mean, I don't think I could afford a monkey, and I'm not exactly on the streets. Obviously I at least have a computer...so, back to the organ grinders. I would have sold the monkey and the organ and been able to eat for at least a year. Or, if I was weirder than I am, I could at least kill the monkey with the organ and eat it. Why on earth did they keep the monkey? It must have cost a fortune to feed...not to mention the mess. That's just one of those many facts of life that are better left mysteries. Especially since no one but me would ask the question. I better go. I think I hear a monkey...Okay...now I'm back. That's the sixth time I've said back! I realize that this longest text ever must be very boring and not worth anyone's time. But I'd like to take this time to thank the 2 and 1/2 people in the entire universe who have bothered to read this entire thing. I'm not exactly sure who they are, but: thanks! Right now, my spacebar is malfunctioning...that's not good...I have to press it two or three times just to insert a freaking space. Maybe the evil little faeries with the sharp little teeth have put their evil faerie dust on my computer. Or maybe not. This is too frustrating. Goodbye for now...Now I'm back. And still frustrated. But for a different reason. Today I had the misfortune of playing a Treasure Planet game on neopets.com It was terrible. Apparently the point of the game was to get your character to shout "Whoo-Hoo!" as many times as possible before you splattered your brains on the rocks, all the while listening to a soundtrack that is similar to a dying ceiling fan. Of course, when I started out I accidentally hit the rocks approximately three million times. Halfway though I used my four remaining brain-cells to decide that the game was dumb. So my goal changed from surviving to laughing evilly while my character died. So the game naturally did everything it could to preserve my life. The stupid game is still going on and I refuse to quit because I want my points. My character is actually dodging the stupid rocks better now then when I controlled him. I hate irony. Seeya. Okay. Now I'm back again. Today I added an update page, which is basically a less chaotic, outlined version of this without all the ranting. It's more like techno talk about arrays and how much I suck and whether or not the Braves will win this year. Okay, the whole braves thing is made up. But everything else I've said so far is true. I think. Maybe I should start on a boring disclaimer...Eh-hem. All contents of this site were designed for entertainment purposes only. Any use thereof that is not stated in the above mentioned statement would make the author, hereby referred to as Patron Saint of Paper Clips, very angry. Should you violate the purpose of this site: i.e. become not entertained, the Patron Saint of Paper Clips will be forced to take drastic measures. This is specified in Code: 343 of the Flaming Chicken Handbook. Ooooo…that’s a great idea! I’m gonna start quoting from the Flaming Chicken Handbook! Code: 343 of the Flaming Chicken Handbook states that the Patron Saint of Paper Clips (that’s me) is allowed to cause vague, pain like sensations while the offending person (or alien life form, dog, etc.) isn’t paying attention. Now I have a purpose in life! To make up quotes from the non-existent Flaming Chicken Handbook, which I’m sure you have a copy of. No? Too bad. It’s in the mail, I promise! Now I must take my leave…and remember. Cheese is watching. Okay...I'm back...I think that eventually half of this thing will consist of the word back over and over again...that's just weird. Which fits the motif of the rest of the site. There's even a money back guarantee. Isn’t' that nice? See? Now no one can ever say that I don't take care of my viewers. Especially since I don't have viewers. I have readers. Wait...I really don't even know if anyone bothers to read this. Even if I put it in a less chaotic, more user-friendly format people would still ignore this because it involves: reading. Yes. Sad to admit, but the majority of people would rather read the summary at the back of a book rather than the whole book itself. What has the world come to? It's pathetic. Especially since I'm bothering to write all this. It's not fair! Why can't I have more readers?! All the other internet writers have nothing on me, except they're better at advertising, having a central theme/plot and basically more talented. Whereas I'm more into the whole ranting and raving stage right now. Plus, I am horrible at spelling. Which is bad. Thank the powers that be for spell-check. The single greatest invention of the computer gods. I'm getting bored, so I think I'm done for the day. May your day be shiney! I'm back again! And I feel weird! I found at that yet another one of my friends is reading this. Creepy. Just how much time do they have on their hands. Perhaps their just trying to be nice. I can just see it now...an organization devoted not to feeding the hungry, or peace, or love or whatever, but to giving recognition to all those poor, pathetic, unpopular websites. I wonder what it's name would be. Don't Ignore Sites? Would it be called DIS? Isn't that like a slang term for an insult? Would that be considered poetic justice, or just a nice coincidence? And why do I even care? I'll tell you why. Because I have nothing else to do right now. I could be playing neopets, but ever since my bad experience with Treasure Planet, I don't feel like it. Oh, by the way, I noticed that whenever I use spell-check, my stupid computer turns the word probley into to word problem. To prevent this, I did nothing. So, it is now up to you, the imaginary reader, to decide whether I mean probley or problem...it's almost like a game! But without the bad sound track. And I promise not to force you to live when you would rather die. Moving on, I have nothing else to say, but don't feel like quitting just yet. I'm like the little engine that could. Or maybe the Energizer Bunny. I just keep going, and going and going. Or I could be like that annoying guy on T.V. who keeps asking if you can hear him. If my site manages to last a decade, my readers *snicker* will probley wonder what I'm talking about. My answer is simple. It doesn't matter. I'm just rambling. Which means that it doesn't matter if you understand anything I say. Doesn't that make you feel better? I bet it does. Wow. Look how long this has gotten. I even impress myself. Who would have thought I have this much free time? And I congratulate any reader who has gotten this far. Ooooooo! You must check out the fortunes section of the random stuff page! I've just gotten an idea for some more, original, fortunes...I gotta go!(may the moose be with you) And now I am back. I swear. If iI fill out the fake tab form I'm gonna have to put back as my favorite word...I already have filled it out, though. Would it be cheating to fill it out again? Only if I had multiple personalities. Or would it be cheating if I didn't have multiple personalities? The world may never know. Just like how many licks it takes to get to the bottom of a tootsie pop. Would it vary? The number of licks, I mean. Someone could have super-disolving spit, or watery-spit. Or what if you took big ol' slobbery licks? Does the commercial take that into account? No. It doesn't. And let me tell you, it's an outrage. It deludes all of American's sweet, innocent, candy-loving children into thinking that a cartoon owl is smarter than they are! "Mr. Owl, can you tell us how many licks does it take to get to the bottom of a tootsie pop?" Or whatever. And "Mr. Owl" replies "One...Twoo...Three! Chomp" And he bites it. That teaches our youth that it's okay to agree to help someone, and then ruin their experiment. Well...it's not. I am going to start a protest group. Teens Against Cartoon Owls. We could call ourselves TACO! I love the little tacos, I love them good! That is a direct quote from GIR, co-star and comic-relief on INVADER ZIM. Hmmmm...intersting. I put hyphens in both of his titles...it must be a conspiracy! I gotta go. Those TACO buttons don't make themselves, you know. I'm back again. And not so cheesed off about the whole tootsie roll pop thing. Right now, I have another twenty minutes on the Internet before I'm gonna watch T.V. And I can't think of anything else to do. So, predictably, here I am. It's not like I have anything better to do. Obviously, you know this. After all, look how long this text is. I wonder if I've made the world record? If I did, would I stop this? Why bother asking? I'll will most likely still be adding to this on my death bed. Hmmmmm...has any old, senile person ever written anything? Was it coherent? Did it make more sense that this text? Is it possible to make less sense? Am I enjoying asking retorical questions? Yes. Yes, I am. But I seriously wonder what something written by a senile person would be like. I've heard of poems and stuff written by people who were high, insane or paranoid. But never senile. Can a senile person write? Aren't they regressed to a child-like state? Does it even matter? Is anyone even reading this? Did I resume asking retorical questions? Do you care? Is this eating up time? I feel like I'm playing questions only on whose line is it anway. I probley should have capitalized something, or underlined but I'm feeling lazy...hey, you try to keep your two and a half readers happy! It's really stressfull. Someday, I'm gonna snap and just delete this entire thing. Gee, I hope not! I worked sorta hard on this. It's great for making random topics weave together to form an overall infrastructure of chaos. That made little sense. That's why it's here, and not some critically acclaimed site. Ooooooooooooo! I'm gonna quote from the FLAMING CHICKENS HANDBOOK again! Yep! I bet you were just breathless in anticipation. Okay. Here goes. Code: 472 of the Flaming Chickens Handbook states that this site in no way aknowledges the existance of other, better sites (hereon reffered to as the Losers) The Losers are a myth. The Patron Saint of Paper Clips (me again!) claims no knowledge as to where that particullary nasty rumor started, but confirms that this is the best site ever. It would be a sin against humanity for a better site to exist. Should you refuse to aknowledge the Patron Saint of Paper Clips as the ruler of the Internet, you will be subjected to punishment as stated in Code 343 of the Flaming Chicken Handbook (i.e. Experience vague, pain-like sensations when you're not paying attention) This has been a public service announcement. This is a test, I repeat only a test. Had this been an actual emergency, we would have bought up all the can openers and charged 3 cows and a pig for each one. I repeat, lock all you doors and windows, this is it. I repeat, there is nothing to worry about. Everything is fine. The end is not here. I'm going, you're on you're own! Ahhhhhhhhhh!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! I'm back!*smiles brightly* And apparantly delusional! Anyway, I just finished rereading my longest text ever. And I became inspired to talk about nothing. You see, I periodically read the longest text ever to check the constant downward spiral of my sanity. Hmmm...I seem to be entertaining myself though, even while reading what I wrote. Which is why I still go to the Really Really Big Button That Doesn't Do Anything website. Because I am easily amused and have lots and lots of time on my hands. Maybe, some day far in the future (like next Thursday) I'll print a copy of this insane text. And then go door to door distributing it. Eventually, this would become a monthly tradition. Whole families would gather around their front door, in breathless anticipation while they attempted to barracade me out. I can just see the whole community rising to thwart my attempts to spread love, joy and insane chaos. I probley wouldn't actually print this out (think how much paper it would take!) but if I do, only friends and enemies will receive copies. Hmmmm...maybe my condition is worsening. Or not. I'm still peeved about the cartoon owl from the Tootsie Roll Pop commercials. He is pure evil. TACO will eventually destroy him. Unless he has already been destroyed by an even more radical Anti-Cartoon-Owl group. I hope not. Or, would that be good? I suppose I could let someone else have the glory. After all, I'm not in this line of buisness for the fame, fortune and power. What line of buisness, do you ask? Why, the assasinating annoying cartoon characters buisness. (Actually I just question them untill they spontaneously combust, I ask lots of questions) So, in conclusion, ladies and gentleman of the jury(that's you) I could not have possibly tortured "Mr. Owl" to death. I love owls. Hmm...I seem to be jumping from one subject to another more frequently. Either I am growing more comfortable with my on-line writing, or I am progressivly getting more insane and chaotic. I also am psyco-analyzing myself a lot today...hmmmm...I'm even saying "hmmmmm..." a lot. Just like a real psychologist. Hmmmmmmm. Time for another boring disclaimer!!!!!!! Code: 742 of the Flaming Chickens Handbook states that in no part does the Patron Saint of Paper Clips (That's still me!) actually claim to be mentally ill. That's either a) a publicity stunt b) An attempt at humor c) a cry for help or d) none of the above You can e-mail your responses by conducting a scavenger hunt of this site. Some of the pages of this site contain a link encouging the two and a half people to e-mail the Patron Saint of Paper Clips. There may also be evil little links that are designed to confuse you. These links send stuff to someone named johnjones333@hotmail.com The Patron Saint of Paper Clips does not know who this individual is, but sincerly wishes that you send all your hate mail to him. Not that the aformentioned individual claims to have received hate mail (or mail of any kind) via a website link. Thank-you for your time. Remember to send your answers to my sanity quiz to the e-mail account, flamingchickens333@hotmail.com Oh, and once I refer to myself in the first person again, the handbook quote is over. I just thought that I might like to mention that. Oh. You're still here. I figured you rush right on over to e-mail me. Perhaps you don't have time to waste e-mailing me. HA! HA! HA! That's funny!!!! If you you don't have time to waste, what are you doing here?!!! Oh, who am I kidding. I figure that even the people I manage to lure onto my site from neopets don't even bother to come to this particular page. Maybe I should make the link come here directly...Hey! What a good idea! That way I can spread my love, joy and insane chaos to more people! I'm a genius. Gotta go, must lure innocent victems to the second most pointless site ever!!!! I'm back. And really angry, and confused. I've always known that I was weird, that's always been a given. But now I realize that I am considerably more normal than the rest of my family. Today we had a "family outing." Now, most families will go bowling, or putt-putt golfing. They may go to a resteraunt with an arcarde, or the movies or to a theme park. Not my family! No, we got the greatest family outing of all. We got to go to a bar and play pool!!!!!*waits for readers to become insanely jealous* Yep, that's right, a bar with a pool table! Not only did we get world class cuisine (under-cooked hotdogs and over-cooked hamburgers), my little sister (age 10) got taught pool by someone I strongly supect is an ex-convict! Naturally when it was announced that we'd be eating dinner in this place, I could hardly contain my excitment(I glared at my mother and asked why we couldn't go to Pizza Hut) When we arrived, we were promptly served (after thirty minutes) In the meantime, we played a family game of pool(my parents played while my brother and sister and I watched) After two rousing rounds, our food came. The food was superb, (our food came the exact opposite of how we ordered it, and half of the onion rings were missing) Then we joyfully returned to our game(my sister and the ex-con played my mom) We spent hours there (from 5p.m.-7:15p.m.) There were many people that were the same age as me and my siblings (no one in the room but us were under 30) Us kids had to be dragged kicking and screaming from the bar ( I almost fell asleep during the last game I watched) As we left, there was a feeling of goodwill and fellowship between all(my sister locked me out of the car and wouldn't let me in untill I started yelling profanity in her general direction) The high point of the entire night was when my mother gave me $21 for my report card. She promptly borrowed $1 to help with the waitresses tip(This part I'm not being sarcastic about) All in all it was a night I'll remember forever (as the lowest point in "family outing"history, except for that time my mom dragged me to a church thing on the concept of truth.) My brother(age 13) even decided upon a new job he wants when he's old enough to work, a busboy at the bar. We had to tell him that he would probley have to wait untill he was 21.(Absolutly nothing about that statement was sarcastic) As you can see, I love my families outings(Not unless you're blind...or stupid) &#!#%&&!!!(*%$ WHAT THE %$#@ WAS MY MOTHER $#$#%$# THINKING!!!!!!!???? BRINGING $#$$# KIDS IN A BAR!? I know it was her idea, 'cause my dad hates it, too. My mom and my stupid little 10-year old sister loves it, though. *sighs* Why does my life have to be so weird? I'm leaving...now I'm back! And not so pissed at my weird family. Now is the time to mourn the loss of one of my most loyal readers (I think she's read the entire thing one time, which is more than anyone else has done so far) She has been banned from accesing any portion of the Internet, do to reasons that must remain confidental due to security reasons. If I told you, I'd have to kill you and all that stuff. So...now I am down to one and a half readers. Untill such time that I have more. I wonder why anyone would read this? You would have to have several characteristics that I possess. First of all, you'd have to have an extrodinary amount of free time. Second of all, you would have to have the patience to read through all of this. And lastly, you'd have to know where the heck this site is. I admit it. I haven't exactly advertised this site. Nor can I find it on any search engines. Some of my pages have stuff written in to make search engines recognize me, but it doesn't seem to be working. What must I do to rise above obscurity? I tell people I know about this site, but they either ignore this page, or don't even bother coming to the site in the first place. I suppose that is the bane of all authors. To pour your heart and soul into a passage, and have everyone ignore it. *sniffle* Why must this be? Maybe I should just give up. After all, no one would really care if I quit updating this site. But I can't help but think of stuff like the evil over lord list and REALLY REALLY BIG BUTTON THAT DOESN'T DO ANYTHING. They are not great neccesarily because of the content, (although that helps some) they are great because of their sheer length. You can read a little each day. And almost never finish. Also, I guess I still am trying to get the world record. I have heard some feedback suggesting that I make someway for people to remember where they stopped reading. It can be very confusing, especially if you weren't paying attention in the first place. Well, I dont want to organize this page, in any manner. This is chaos. And insanity. Not neat little text in classifiable rows, in alphabetical order. If you want neat, go to some other site(though, as mentioned in Flaming Chickens Code:472 there is no such thing as a site better than this one). Otherwise, I guess you're stuck with me. Awwwww...I'm touched! You didn't run screaming to another site, thankfull for the chance to escape this insanity. You're still here, which must mean that you'd rather be here than anywhere else! Hey, where are you going?! I thought you were gonna stay here and keep me company?! *drags reader back* See, I knew you'd stay! *gagged reader glares* What's that? I know this is the best site ever, thanks for the compliment! *reader starts inching towards freedom* I better go...I think that I may have a problem brewing. I'm back. And very concerned about this new, younger generation (all 10 year olds who were born in 1992) They are supposed to be the future. Instead they appear to be a nuclear armagedon in the form of a fifth grader. I chanced to have an interview with an informant from this evil generation (my little sister) who will be called Mrs. X for security reasons (no, she's not married, the "Mrs" makes it good as a disguise) I was quizing Mrs. X on Civil War History for an upcoming test in her classroom (whose location can not be devulged) Mrs. X seemed fluent in the subject. Using prior knowledge, I deduced that Mrs. X was full of crap. Out of sheer curiosity, I asked Mrs. X who participated in the Civil War. She immediatly replied "Clara Barton". I clarified, which countries fought in the Civil War. She answered: England, Russia, and (out of sheer desperation) Iraq. I believe that she was just listing countries she knows America has fought against. Now, correct me if I'm wrong...but Iraq? I don't know if Iraq even existed in the Civil War Era! Why on earth would we go have way across the world to fight them when we didn't even really need oil?!! Moving on, I finaly managed to coax my sister (I'm tired of writing Mrs. X) to tentativly guess that America fought in the Civil War. I mean, who'd a thought? America? Fighting in the American Civil War? In a moment of inspiration, I asked her who America fought. Her first guess was enslaved africans. Well, at least she knows that slaves were involved in the war. Before she could start listing all of America's enemies, I gave her a hint. I said "The Union fought..." With a crack, snaple and pop, some random synapses in her brain connected in the right order and she said "CONFEDERACY!!!" I was very proud of her, just as you would be proud of a two-year-old who has just announced: "I WENT POO-POO ON THE POTTY!!!!!" What I mean is, you wouldn't be very proud if the average person said that they just took a dookey on the toilet, and you wouldn't be very proud if they knew who fought against the Union in the Civil War. I confirmed that the Union was Northern and Free, and that the Confederacy was Southern and Slave. We resumed quizzing and she got every question on the worksheet correct. This is because she memorizes the questions. That way, she can pass the test without actually learning anything. You see, if you memorize stuff, you only have to remember that the answer to number 6 is Clara Barton for a week, rather than having to remember that Clara Barton started the Red Cross for the rest of you life. I sincerely appologize if anyone is offended by my view of memorization. I also would like such persons to immediatly leave my site. You don't belong here. You see...knowledge is good. If my sister...uh...Mrs. X were ever asked a question on the Civil War on a quiz show, she'd come up with nothing. With knowledge you can win money and the opportunity to look like a dork on national television. My sister is a big believer in the memorization system. I previous time when I was studying with her (American Revolution, this time) I was trying to help her remember the difference between the Patriots(Patriotic to America) and the Loyalists (Loyal to Britain) She didn't know what the word patriotic meant. I tried to explain. I asked her how you dress on the forth of july (she said nice) I asked what the colors red, white and blue were (pretty). I gave up in exasperation. More recently, I was trying to instill a sense of empathy and niceness in her. I asked her what the golden rule of christianity was. She didn't know. When I pressed her, she confessed she didn't know what chrisianity was. Completly defeated, I told her that it was the religion she practiced every Sunday when she went with her friends to church. This confirmed my suspicion that she only went so that she could have the use of the church's playground equipment. My family also strongly suspects that she stole $20 from the donation thingy. Anyway, that's my rant on the new generation that contains my little sister. When someone of her generation runs for president, I'm gonna do a complete background check. If they're anything like my sister, I'm movin' to Canada. Gotta go...the Russian-Brittish-Iraqi-enslaved-Africans are coming to defeat the Mexicans. I'm back! *there's that darn cricket again* And I have a genuine question to ask all of my loyal readers *cough-cough* Okay, here it is: Is it normal for a non-gender specific sibling to carry around various dead reptiles (snakes, turtles, lizards etc.) Furthormore, is it considered accepted behavior to talk to these dead reptiles, in a cooey, baby talky kind of voice? Finnaly, is it expected for said sibling's non-gender specific parent to encourage such behavior, citing "I was just like that as a child" as an excuse? It's an honest question as I fear that my non-gender specific sibling is weird. Who am I kidding? My entire family is weird. It's just a matter of degree. Hey, by the way. I'm sorry that my last few entries have been only about my various family antics. Although I can't see why you care, because there is a large probability that you do not exist, because I don't think anyone is reading this anymore. How discouraging. People need to make the time to waste time. It's a time honored tradition. Who'd thought that I could use time that many times in only a few sentences? It's been pretty quiet here lately, which is why I haven't added anything to this text in awhile. I know, you were just crushed that nothing new was happening. It's a sad, cold, cruel world out there and you had nothing to relieve the monotony of it. *sniffle* I feel so sorry for you! Next thing you know, you're internet connection will die. Well, too bad! Do you know I never even had a computer untill just a few months ago (that's why I'm obsessivly writing here) So I won't pity you if you're computer dies for unexpected reasons. Time for another quote from the FLAMING CHICKEN HANDBOOK!!! Code: 843 of the Flaming Chicken Handbook states that in no way is the Patron Saint of Paper Clips (guess who?) responsible for any faulty wiring or lack thereof in your computer. The Patron Saint of Paper Clips in no way wishes harm on your computer. Any derogatory statement is simply an opinion of an individual, not of the flaming order of the flaming chickens. Said order will in no way be held responsible for any damages, injuries, loss of life, limb, head, or organs. Okay, quote is done. Maybe I should put quotation marks around them...nah, too much work. But I probably will eventually get around to having a seperate page just for the FLAMING CHICKEN HANDBOOK. That way all the members (what members) can print out a copy of it for themselves (if they didn't get that copy in the mail) I guess I'm done for the day...I know. You want me to stay. It's okay. Because eventually, I'll be back! Seeya! I'm back. And once again suprised. When I was at a TAB poetry thingy (TAB is good TAB is great We love TAB) I met some new people. One of these people (who shall remain nameless untill such time that I have explicit permission to use her name) turned out to be almost as weird as me. As in...she read the ENTIRE Longest Text Ever. The whole thing. So far two whole people (to my knowledge) have read the entire thing, and a few people have skimmed it. That means I really can justify claiming to have two and a half readers! I'm so happy! That means my pointless obsession has actually entertained someone besides me! Perhaps, one day, far in the future, this will actually be a world record and random people will acutally voluntarily read this text every day. Or maybe not. The point is that it is nice to have readers. Or maybe it's not...I mean...won't the quality *snicker* of my work deteriorate if I am no longer writing for the target audience of me? If that happens, then no one will read this. And then I'll be writing for me again. And then the quality will rise. And then people will start reading. And then the quality will go down and the vicious spiral of good and bad will continue untill I either give up this text, or go crazy...er. In any case...I should probably find a topic. Yeah...a topic would be good. Or...I could just continue to write about finding a topic. Ooooo! I know a topic! Ice cream trucks! This has been bothering me for a while. You see...when it's hot, you want something cold to eat. Conviently, ice cream trucks come around during the hottest part of the year (it must be a conspiracy). As you may or may not know, small children swarm the ice cream trucks. The vendors even play whimsical music which I strongly suspect contains subliminal messages to make you hungry for ice cream. The vendors get oodles of cash, and the kids get ice cream. Now, in today's society of buying groceries on-line and getting them delivered, why hasn't any other food industry marketed this ingenius idea to bring the product to the consumer. I can just see Hot Dog, and Pizza trucks roaming the neighbor hoods, selling treats to hungry children...and adults. Of course, said adults would have to peel their butt-cheeks off the couch...but they'd have to do that for the delivary man anyway. The food trucks could even play music that made you hungry for their food. Then the problem with obesity in America would be blamed on evil food truck drivers as opposed to the harmless, benificient television and computer. We could all breath a sigh of relief as parents kept their children inside, away from the evil truck drivers and near the T.V. Gone would be the days when parents told children to play outside, it's a nice day. Parents would buy their children computers, video games and other television neccesities. This, of course would expand the market for such products. This would lead to a better, more stable economy. Food industires would be buying cars, gas and music. Parents would increase the purchase of entertainment items. In return companies would make a profit, pay their workers better. The workers would then be able to afford more entertainment items and the upward spiral would continue, as opposed to the evil downward spiral of my writing. In conclusion, Ladies and Gentlemen...if you implement my idea, there will be peace and prosperity for all. As long as you don't mind a few more couch potatoes. Gotta go...I think I hear a catchy jingle. I'm back...it's been awhile since I've written here. A lot has happened. Like my EVIL school computer deleting my updates page. But it's all good. Especially since I just saw The Matrix: Reloaded. The following text may spoil the movie for you, so WARNING: do no read this unless you have already seen the movie. Okay. What I liked best was the philosophy on choices. (the mindless fight scenes were really cool, too). It's like this. In the beginning of the movie, Neo is having dreams about Trinity's death. Later, The Oracle tells him that he has already decided her fate. Towards the end of the movie, Neo chooses to tell Trinity to stay out of the Matrix, since he saw her die in it. She agrees, but only after seeing how important it is to him. After a horrific chain of events (is it coincidence, or fate) the people who will deactivate the secondary power source of the building Neo is infiltrating, die. So...the plan is going to fail. Unless someone does something, Neo, Morpheus and many others will die. Trinity, who is of course outside of the Matrix, knows this and chooses to enter the Matrix to save the day. The events of Neo's dream unfold. So...when the oracle said that the choice had already been made, she was completely correct. The moment Neo woke from dreams of Trinity's death, he made a choice. He would do everything in his power to keep his dream from becoming reality. So he kept her out of the Matrix, and she saw the problem, and entered the Matrix to fix it. If she had been in the Matrix, she would have likely been with Morpheus, never would have known about the plan's failure, would therefore not have been in the situation that resulted in her death. And the plan would have failed and Neo might have died, along with a large portion of the city (the building was set to blow if there was any intruders) So...Neo's choice to attempt to save Trinity triggered the sequence of events that led to her death. As Neo realizes all of this, through a nearly omniscient Architect of the Matrix, he makes another choice. This choice is simply an extension of his original choice: he will save Trinity at all costs. Neo is told that he has two choices. He can save mankind, and doom Trinity. Or he can try to save Trinity and doom mankind. No guarantee that he'll succeed in saving Trinity. He goes for Trinity, makes it just in time to catch her body, and starts her heart back up. In return for not taking the easy route, he gains a power in the more or less real world. He can deactivate the machines, (squidies) but at great personal cost. The movie ends with him in a coma. Now, you must realize that I have described only one aspect of this movie of all movies. There are not enough words in the English language to describe the sheer coolness of the fight choreography, special effects and the plot. I highly recommend you see the movie yourself. I'm sorry that today's rant isn't random, insane or completely chaotic, but I must right my experience with The Matrix before I forget. I am so buying this movie when it comes out on DVD. I love it! You have to admit its sheer coolness. I mean, come on! It's the sequel to the movie that revolutionized the standard by which we judge special effects. I better stop typing before I have a heart attack...just remember...The Matrix has you...I'm back. And throughly pissed off at my school system in general. You see...they feel that the only way to reward academic achievement...yada-yada-yada...is to force the smart kids to be ushers for Senior Honor Nite, and Graduation. Where is the logic in this? I for one, didn't know about such dire consequences for not deliberatly failing classes. It was bad enough that I was forced to "volunteer" my precious time (i could have worked on this site)...no...I was forced to wear formal attire. My school system is stuck in the past...and formal attire means...a dress...a white dress...(for those you who never bothered to find out...I am indeed female). So...for the first time in about 5 years...I wore a dress...and something that was complelty white. What cruel fate is this? To compound the EVIL situation...I was forced to wear feminine shoes. In other words...they hurt. And they pushed my toes together. Since I have a rather weird phobia of touching my own skin...this made my evening my own personall torture session. I think that such gender-specific torture should be deemed inhumane and abolished from our great society...of flaming chickens. Henceforth...Code: 666 of the Flaming Chickens Handbook states that under no circumstance will the Patron Saint of Paper Clips (guess who) be forced to wear anything other than a t-shirt and preferably black jeans. Should you violate this right, you will become destroyed or possibly dizzy. I'm leaving now...I have some destruction to do. i'm back. from graduation. we had to get there one hour and fifteen minutes early because there was traffic. After standing around a lot...the ceremony started. Lots of people spoke. by the time I had to do my part (tell people where to stand before getting their diploma) it was dark. there were bugs. they liked landing on me. then...i got to go stand while people said a lot of stuff. i couldn't hear it because someone had put the speakers facing the audience. we clapped. the whole time, even during the name-calling, seniors were playing with silly string and beachballs. afterwards...they turned off the lights. there were lots of fireworks. i wandered around for 20 minutes looking for a cell phone. i called home, and waited another hour for my ride...traffic to the school was one way. i felt sorry for my dad. i am tired...but cannot go to sleep. i'll copy and paste this to my site. maybe the longest text ever. you will all suffer as i have suffered when and if you graduate. i cannot feel my feet. i hate dress shoes. I'm back. Today, I'm here to salute the Pointless Signs Of America! The PSOA have been whole-heartedly working for you, and what have you done for them? NOTHING! These so-called "pointless" signs are doing just what they were meant to do: entertain you! You cannot judge them simply because they have no apparant function. They expand your mind, making you think about all the things they could do. They could do anything they wanted to, if they just put their minds to it. If you judged everything by what it doesn't acomplish, then the entire world is populated by pointless beings. Noone can do everything, so how can you expect a SIGN, with the I.Q. of toilet paper, to do everything. You people sicken me. You expect far to much of the inanimate world. The inanimate world, on the otherhand, expects nothing of you. Which is exactly what it gets. If you expect nothing, and get nothing, you feel nothing. If you expect nothing and get something, you're happy. But, if you expect something and get something you feel nothing. And if you expect something and get nothing, you feel cheated. If you're following along, and not completly confused, you'll realize that it is better to be a pessimist than an optomist. Yep that's right. This entry went from saluting the PSOA to making a statement about my ideals. This has been a weird day. You can thank my associate "Meg" she came up with the PSOA acronym. Everyone, clap for "Meg".I gotta go...seeya later! I'm finnaly back! Today, I took a long look at this site, which is the acomplishment of almost a year of work. And I asked myself "How could I have better spent my time?" And so, in the interest of wasting even more time, I made a list. Here we go! Number One: I could have cured cancer. Not that I know anything about medicine...or cancer for that matter. But I'm sure that if I just would have put my mind to it, I could have done it. Number Two: I could helped the earth to find eternal and lasting peace. Which would be boring. So I at least have an excuse for not doing that. Number Three: I could have studied and stuff. Uh...don't think so...Number Four: I could have learned to drive. This would have resulted in the deaths of numerous pedistrians...and I would still probably be wondering around in search of a McDonalds. Number Five: I could have read more books, played more video games and watched more mindless television. Gee...I wish I'd thought of that sooner. Number Six: I could have implemented one of several plans for world domination. Or, as an alternative, I could have ruined several plans for world domination that other people made. Number Seven: I could drive people crazy. Wait...aren't I already doing that? Scratch number seven. And on to: Number Eight: I could have...uhhhh...ummmmm...actually thought up these things before hand. Number Nine: Now it's just getting redundant, isn't it? Number Ten: This is the list that never ends. Yes, it goes on and on my friend. One person, started typing it not knowing what it was, and they'll continue typing it forever just because this is the list that never ends, yes it goes on and on my friends, some person started typing it not...etc, etc. Okay...I admit it. I have officialy run out of ways I could have better spent my time. I don't think there actually are any. Except for maybe five and six. Now, those have possibilities. However, I am currently content to just sit here and type. For the benefit of you, the reader...who may or may not exist. Either way, I'm continuing to sort of entertain myself. I feel like I should be outraged about some topic or another. I just can't work up the energy to be outraged. Perhaps a nice, soothing mistrust. Yeah. I can work with mistrust. I definitly mistrust lots of stuff. Like organ grinders, and the evil conspiracies. Did you know, that Kodak was part of the conspiracy to assasinate John F. Kennedy. Now, some of you are probably thinking "Gee, Really?", or "Wow, I never knew that!" while others are thinking "Who's John F. Kennedy?" or possibly "Who or What is Kodak". I fervently hope that you're not thinking the last two...especially about Kodak. Kodak, as you may know, is a film developing company. And John F. Kennedy (JFK) was an alien bent on global domination. Or possibly a really good president who wanted to fly to the moon. Either way, he got assasinated. And ever loony in America decided that it was a conspiracy. Some even go so far as to claim that Kodak "changed" the pictures of the assasination to make an assasination in the bushes become a tree's shadow. I didn't know that they had such good technology back then. I have to wonder...why would Kodak do such a thing. Perhaps Kodak is actually a front organization for a shadowy governmental system that controls the entire world and didn't want mankind to obtain the freedom of the stars and so tried to sabotauge the space program even though it didn't work as well as they planned. Or perhaps not. Either way, Kodak is undeniably evil. How can any company that takes so many "wholesome" pictures not be? You can just bet that they look at every one that get's turned in to them, judging blackmail value, and whether or not you could get arrested. It's just sickening, you can't even take a simple photo nowadays. Unless you have a digital camera, which are a symbol of freedom from the old ways and willing enslavement to the new ways. We can only hope that the digital camera manufacturers are kinder masters than the evil Kodak Lords. I better go...I think Kodak is tracing my site....I'm back now! And, once again, I have proof that someone actually took the time (two hours) to read this entire Longest Text Ever! It's amazing, it's incredible, it's unbelievable. But true. Even more incredible, this time it's someone I don't even know! Wooooooo! I feel inspired and happy and other really good emotions and stuff. And so, I'll take a trip down memory lane, to the dark depths of the past, to when I decided to make this page. It was inspired, in part, by my sheer and utter boredom. In school, back before I even owned a computer, I'd type random words for long periods of time, 'cause I had nothing better to do. Once I got this computer, I decided to do something similar on my beloved site. But, it ended up making more sense than I anticipated (scary thought, huh). Oh, well...I tired of nostalgia. Back to the present. Right now, I'm just typing so that no one can say that I've been slacking off. I don't think I have any conspiracy theories...except pop-ups/pop-unders. Have you ever had the evil pop-up that says that if you click here, it'll get rid off all the annoying pop-ups? Isn't that sort of ironic? Could the pop-up blocker people have chosen a better means to advertise their product? It's like grand-theft auto 3's talk show, you know, the one where there are Citizens Raging Against Phones? Or CRAP, for short. And the lady representing them, calls the radio station...on a phone. It's stupid and ironic and just shouldn't exist in a better world. Pop-Up ad's help you get rid of pop-up ads? Insane, chaotic...hmmmmm...I wonder who thought of it? Was it on purpose, or was it just some mistake? It is now my civic duty to discover this ancient mystery, and reveal it to the uncaring world. Or maybe I'll go make a frozen pizza. Yeah. That sounds good, too. Since I'm not particualarly inspired at the moment, I should leave and let you gather what is left of your sanity. I just can't seem to stop, though. Okay...I can do it. I'm leaving. I'm back...and it's several hours later. I've decided to imortalize the stupidity of my dog, Moose. She is a heavy-set Yorkshire Terrior (12 lbs.) In otherwords, she's a small yappy dog who is big for her breed. Today, I met her arch-enemy. An enemy so terrifying that Moose cannot stop shaking. An enemy so hideous that Moose must destroy it at all costs. An enemy so dangerous that Moose fears it above all others. Now you may be wondering what horrible beast is Moose's arch-enemy. And you probably suspect that it is something pathetic. You would be correct in your suspiciousness...for Mooses arch-enemy is...*dramatic drumroll*...a small, white, feather. Now, Moose has seen many feathers, birds even. But none have struck terror in her little moose heart like this particular feather. So...naturally I put her arch-enemy in my pocket and brought it home with me. This action has made her very suspicious of where my loyalties lie. She tracks the feather smell all over the house, and goes crazy whenever I take it out of my pocket. She even got her sister and mother in the spirt of things. Now her sister sounds an alarm whenever she sees the evil feather. Now, you may be wondering what is so terrifying about a small, white, feather. So am I. It doesn't smell funny, (I asked my brother, since I don't have a sense of smell), it seems perfectly ordinary. So, I've decided that Moose works for some secret government organization, and that the feather is the key to the destruction of the world, and I am just blithely letting it enter our home, so that it may furthur its evil plans to destroy the universe. That is the only possible explanation as to why it upsets her so much. Or...maybe it's the feather off of the cartoon owl from the tootsie-roll pop comercials (one...two...three..*crunch*). Whatever the case, I decided that the whole world, (or three of four random people) deserve to know that if the world and or universe are destroyed, it's the evil, little, white, feather's fault. Now I'd better go and torture my Moose with it...:) I am officially back. And you, the potentially non-existant reader gets a once in a lifetime chance to hear me rant and rave about my Horrible, Horrible Family Vacation. I know. You feel very, very honored. It's like this. My mother is a control freak, and she decided on the spur of the moment that we were going north to visit relatives. Later that day, she decided we were NOT going north, we were going south to a beach resort. Still later that day, she got offended at some trivial thing and decided that we weren't going anywhere at all. The very next day, she decided that we were going north, after all. So, we packed everthing up. Before we knew it, we were on the road. The first part of the trip was fairly easy. As in, I was half-asleep, hoping that we'd arrive while I slept. Then, in an inspired move, my brother talked my mother into letting him sit up front. That meant that my mother would be in the back, with me and my younger, eviler sister. Immediatly, my mother started complaining. It was uncomfortable in the back, it was too hot, it was too cold. Then, she accidently woke our three yappy dogs up, and they relized that they were in a car. That meant only one corse of action for them. They started shaking and barked their little heads off. This annoyed my mother further, untill she asked, no, demanded that my father turn the car around so that we could go home. Unfortuantly, we had already driven 337 miles toward our destination. After much argument, my father was going to turn around, untill he realized that my mother was going to drop the dogs and me off, and then turn around and continue north. This seemed slightly unpracticle, so we ended up not taking that 337 mile detour. We eventually reached our destination after 16 hours of virtually non-stop driving. We got there, we ate. We slept. My mother visited relatives. And so the week went by. I got to go to a huge library, and see Terminator 3 at the local theater. That was the high point of the entire trip. The last day, we were deciding where to eat. My mom said that she didn't care. So my dad picked a steak place. My mother tried to order a mushroom-swiss burger...only to discover that the place had no swiss-cheese. So she decided on a salad, only to discover that they didn't have her favorite salad dressing. After much deliberation, she decided that she wouldn't eat. After complaining how hungry she was, and about the poor quality of the resteraunt, she walked out of the resteraunt, instructing the rest of us to "enjoy our meals". And I wonder where my little sister gets her annoyingness. Not that my mother is annoying...just set in her ways. The whole meal thing was about the only interesting thing to happen during the week. On the way home, we had gotten approximatly 4 hours into the trip when my mother predicatably decided that we had to go back and eat at the 50th aniversary of her favorite ice cream place. Needless to say, we ignored her. Oh, and when my sister had to go to the bathroom very badly during a traffic jam, my mother had the good taste to making hissing/water noises to make my sister's problem worse. She claimed that my little sister always did it to her, and she was getting pay-back. Between her bickering with my sister, and obsessivly playing neopets games, I don't know what to do with her. Anyway...that was my family vacation rant. It sucked. No suprise. At least it's over. Sorry if I complained a lot. If you don't like it, start your own longest text ever. Anyway, I promise to go back to my usual routine the next time I rant here. I thought of a topic on the way home, but forgot it. Seeya. I'm back! I know, I took you completly by suprise. You thought you'd gotten rid of me. *cheesy super-hero voice* Well, fear not, random citizen, for I, PSOPC am here! *normal voice* Today I have a very important to discuss with you in this: PERFECTLY NORMAL PUBLIC SERVICE ANNOUNCMENT. Yes, that's right. It's time to warn you, the viewer...er...reader...about the evils of various stuff. Today's lesson is: subliminal messages . That's right, folks, mass hypnosis via commercials. Now, I'm sure you've at least heard of subliminal messages , right? No? Well...prepare to be enlightened. Subliminal messages are an advertising technique that puts hidden pictures and words into a main image. You don't see them, but your subconsious (dreaming) mind does. Your subconsious mind acts on whatever it is told. What does this mean to you? It means that WAL-MART TV IS EVIL! EVIIIIIIIIIIIIL!!!!!! Why else would they invest all that money to show commercials in their own store? Because they put subliminal messages in them, of course! Subliminal messanging also explains the successes of certain fast-food resteraunts, and brand name items. BEWARE YOUR TOASTER OVEN! Okay. That had nothing to do whatsoever with subliminal messages...it's just cool to say. Anyway, only watch wal-mart if you WANT to be subliminaly entertained into purchasing a new set of TUPERWARE, even though your old set is PERFECTLY fine. This has been a public service announcment. Pretty cool, huh? Uh...you don't have to take the subliminal stuff seriously. It's true, and all, but I have no proof about wal-mart, or certain fast food resteraunts. It makes sense, though. Wal-mart TV is evil. You cannot deny it. Seeya...hmmm..I wonder if there's subliminal stuff in my computer...I'm back. And I feel that it's time for a FAKE commercial break, for the highly informed, obviously brain-dead consumer. And now, a word from our non-existant sponsor. Ketchup: The only food that you'll want to eat after traveling to the 5th Dimension. It's been practically proven that Ketchup transforms into a highly intoxicating (non-addictive) delicious substance upon returning from the 5th Dimension. Stock up now with our Valu-Pak to recieve 3-metric tons of Ketchup, all for the low, low price of your brain, since you're obviously not using it anyway. Then, just wait for technology to "catch-up" (get it, catch-up, Ketchup?)so you can travel to the 5th Dimension like our scientists almost did. (Next Commercial) Get ready fo: Faux's new "reality" TV show, "How Low Can We Go?" It's about six contestants who compete to create the worst, least likely "reality" TV show. The winner not only gets the million-dollar prize, they get the chance to produce the show they created. Remember: if the show sucks, it's their fault, not ours!(Next exciting commercial!)And for all the idiots out there: Try new and improved Dum-B-Gon! Dum-B-Gon stimulates brain activity, making you up to 10 times smarter! Not only that, Dum-B-Gon: stimulates weight loss, cures "any" illness, does simple houshold chores, never leaves the toilet seat up and is the perfect gentle companion for your kids. How can you pass up this revolutionary new product? It's yours for only 3 bi-monthly payments of $3.95 ($3,95,000 on days ending in "y")Don't forget, Dum-B-Gon is practically guaranteed!* (*Not a guarantee) (Next commercial)Have you ever wondered why food sometimes goes bad in your fridge, even if you've only had it a few years? It's because of the "evil little faeries with sharp little teeth." These "faeries" sprinkle your food with highly toxic "age dust" and ruin a perfectly good four-year-old meatloaf. How do you stop them? With our patented "spray". Our "spray" kills over 99.9% of "faeries" (which are much to small to see) Our "spray" also kills most disease causing agents, like rats, or pigeons. WARNING: Leave food sit in an open, well-venilated spot for a week before eating. And now, back to our featured presentation. Wasn't that semi-entertaining? I bet you wanna go eat some Ketchup covered Dum-B Gon right now, while watching "reality" TV. Just make sure you "spray" your food first. Pathetic, wasn't it? Oh, well. I was bored, and a dilligent reader suggested I make fake commercials, so...therer they are. Happy? Good. I'm leavin', for now. I'm back. And I'm willing to enlighten you, the potentially you-know-what reader. Today, I was checking out some weird news. At one point, I read an article that stated that it had been proven, conclusivly, that Kansas was flatter than the standard pancake. The researches even used highly advanced technololgy to map the surface of a pancake and compare it to documented geology of Kansas. Some people disagree, the director of the Kansas Geological Survey said "I think this is part of a vast breakfast food conspiracy to denigrate Kansas. It's a cheap shot." So...doesn't that make you want to take Kansas' side (I sincerly appologize if you are from Kansas). It just seems extremly weird (and worthy of mentioning) that this semi-important guy from Kansas believes in a "vast breakfast food conspiracy". Makes you think that the long held belief that Kodak conspired with the JFK assasin(s) is normal. Another article claims that an anitseptic turned a polar bear purple, drawing large crowds of people. I sure hope other zoos won't copy them. Before you know it, we'll have orange alligators, pink tigers and blue lions. School children won't be able to correctly identify the color of a zebra. Random people will think they've gone crazy, after a seemingly innocent visit to the zoo. It's wrong, I tell you. A complete and total degregation of our societies values. What values, you say? The basic moral belief that Polar bears should be WHITE. Unless we spray-painted the snow purple, too. Then it would be okay. As long as the bear blends in, you know? Speaking of animals, there's a cat in California who is a kleptomaniac (likes to steal stuff). He sneaks into neighboring homes, and takes clothing, wrapped christmas presents, and anything he can find. He then leaves them under his owners car. Okay, better leave. I'm back. And I don't really have a topic today. I'm just bored. Sometimes I just do this, you know? Start typing without any idea about what it is I intend to say. Maybe I subconsiously DO know what I'm doing here, but refuse to admit it to myself. Or maybe I am monumentally bored and don't have anything else to do at the moment. Either way, I'm here. You must be pretty bored, too. Otherwise, why on earth (beta, krpto, zkdjf, Planet X, whatever) would you be here? It would make no sense. If you have something better to do, why wouldn't you be doing it right now? I would be. But, maybe that's just the difference between you and me. Yeah. That must be it. Unless you're bored. Then I completly understand. I need to find a topic. Here, topic, topic, topic! Come on, I won't hurt you, I promise! *hides large ax behind back* Come here, topic! Why are you afraid of little ol' me? *sigh* There are no topics anywhere near me. Kinda like me and "Meg" webcomic we are trying to do. It's called Hit-Or-Miss, any topics, plot, etc. are completly accidental and are not the fault/responsibility of the creators. That was sort of a topic, even though it was sort of random. Which is what I do best. Okay, I'm done with that litte commercial. What now...hmmmmm...should I share with you more of my paranoid/delusional conspiracy theories? Or have I been doing that too much lately? Oooooo! I know, I'll start of list of why it's fun/good to be insane/weird! #1You can say or do anything and normal people will agree with you in the hopes that you'll be satisfied, shut up, and go away. Far away. I will show you an example with this completly true stuff that I experienced several years ago. ME: My vicious, psychotic, flesh-eating bunny-rabbit wants to rule the world. RANDOM PERSON: Uh-huh, that's nice. ME: Yeah, but I told her that she'd be a terible ruler. I mean, she traded Asia for a carrot! And she doesn't even LIKE carrots! RANDOM PERSON: You don't say? ME: Yep. She also is the goddess of red jello. RANDOM PERSON: *head explouding from sheer insanity* As you can see, I was a very weird child (this happened in elementary school...uh...except for that head-explouding part). Okay...on to: #2 You can get out of practically anything by saying: a)It's against my religion b)I'm allergic to that. c)I have an extremly irrational fear of that. d)I already did that in a past life and it sucked. e)My psychotic bunny predicted I'd die doing it. Unfortunalty, several of those reasons LEGITAMITLY apply to a certain activity I do every Tuesday, which WILL NOT BE NAMED HERE LEST I GIVE IT POWER OVER ME! I'm allergic to parts of it, have irrational fears about others and I'm pretty sure it's against my Jenny religion...along with eating mashed potatoes, or potatoes of any kind. I'll add that to the FLAMING CHICKENS HANDBOOK. Thou shalt not eat spuds. Hmmmm...time for #3You can obsessive over ANYTHING, and people will think nothing of it. I, personally, am obsessed with, kitties, bunnies, bats, this website, drawing, making intriate little patterns with strings, doing mildly repetitive activities, being weird, apparantly making lists and cheese...and chickens...and flame. Fire is good. Fire is free. Fire is my friend...until it burns me. Then it must die...painfully. And on to:#4You make your friends look normal in comparison. And #5: You can give each of your pets several weird names such as: Ringling-Raison-Bailey-Suzana-Midnight-Schultz, Squirell, Moose, Moose-Moose, Moosey-Moose, Linzey-Moose, Muffin, Squirell-Muffin, Yabby-Doodle, Abby Normal, Wiggle-Baby, Wiggle-Muffin, Witle-Baby, Cheese-Monkey, Muffin-With-Squirell-Juice, Squirell-With-Muffin Juice, Moosey-Juice, Squirell-Monkey, etc. Now, wasn't that a fun list!? Doesn't that just make you proud to be weird? I should make bumber stickers saying that. Proud to be weird. It'd be cool. Anyway, gotta go! *yawn* I'm back. Last night I was super-charged with lots of sugar and not a lot of sleep. I ended up writing things during the time of night when EVERYTHING is hilarious, including the word sheep. To compound things, I wasn't alone, and things just escalated. The following is everything I wrote during that sugar-coated time period. Some are answers to e-mails, the rest are just stuff I wrote.

Definitly. THen we go to library. Guess what? Me and Josh ate lots and lots of sugar, and it's late at nite and everything is funny but we can't laugh 'cause everybody is sleepin' so it's even funnier but ever since we drank the water we sobered up even though we weren't drunk but we ate sugar...lots and lots of sugar. MOstly donut cake. Okay. JOsh says it was only one piece of cake. WE got it at Wal-mart. Or his mom did. OR something. Goodbye...oh, and the fresh chicken wings might be to blame. they were special wings. I hope I remember doing this. I think it's pretty funny. > You have blue hari..*gigles* I like hair. Josh says I probably won't remember writing any of this, but I can't sleep. THe cake was good. aSk anybody. Big Brother may be listening right now so I beter go. They're listening for a secrret...no it's cause of a secret. But the secret doesn't exist so they are stupid. *g8ggles* bye. Yes. Megan has hair. I've seen it. *giggling* It's very, very late at nite. ONly not really. i like sugar. NO, wait. It's early. WE have been having very profound thoughts lately. We think. THey might havve been important, but we keep forgetting them. We're not sure. Josh wants his thought back. *sniffle* i do, too. It's not fair. I think mine involved a jaunty song to sing. But I couldn't have sung it 'cause it would have woken everyone up and they would have called me inconsiderate. I have to get up really early to leave for home. I should be asleep. *gigles* It milght have been a sugar rush 'cause now we're having a sugar crash. OR, maybe it's the writing. Okay, maybe it was the ranch dressing instead of the special, fresh buffalo wings. But they really were'nt buffoal wings 'cause buffalo's don't have wings...cause they come off when they are babies, JOsh says so and he must be right causse he's been having Profound Thoughts even though he cannot remember them. But, the wings were'nt really special. I don't think. Maybe we're just really, really tired and had sugar. I don't want to play the stupid animal war card game 'cause the stupdi bear gets eaten by an eaagle.. ...goodbye ssslllee0yyyyslllllllleeeeeeeepppppppppppppyyyyyyyyyyy iiiiiiiiissssssssssssss gggggggggoooooooooooooddddddddddddd.............

As you can see, I was in a very interesting state of mind. I hadn't had a genuine sugar rush since I was 11. It was fairly fun. Although I acted like an idiot. Oh, well. I have more stuff to write, but I gotta go right now. Stay tuned to hear my thoughts on tanning, and an evil card game, and who knows what else...Okay I'm back. Here's what I wrote this weekend: Woooooo! 5000 hits! Aren't I special? *sigh* I can't think of anything to write. But I must. I must defeat the sister site of the Longest Text Ever! I mean, I've been doing this much, much longer than the other person. Hmmmmm...monkey. Why do weird people (myself included) obsess about monkeys? And, are monkeys spelled monkies? It just looks weird. Like a division of mounties made entirely out of monks. I bet it's spelled monkeys. It looks right. Maybe I should use spell-check. But...that'd be a lot of work, unlike ranting, raving and rambling. Hey, it's the 3 r's! No longer does school teach use reading, riting and 'rithmitic, it now teaches us ranting, raving and rambling! (and redundancy!) After all, isn't that basicly what the best teachers do? It sets a perfect example for you young, impressionable minds. Those are the best kind. *yet another highly dramatic, time-consuming sigh* I need a topic. A good one. Not one of those bargain ones anyone can find at your local topic discount outlet store. I'll rant and rave and ramble about the EVILS of sunlight. Most people actually like to spend long periods of time exposing their vulnerable skin to the harmful rays of the sun. These people have obviously suffered major brain damage from their prolonged exposure to the sun. The actually think that their skin's efforts to protect them are ATTRACTIVE. It'd be like someone thinking that scabs are atractive, 'case they protect you from disease. Then everyone would cut and scrape themselves to be covered in scabs. That's exactly what tanning is like. Purposly damaging the skin so you can look "attractive". Now, a long time ago, people were sort of smarter. They avoided the sun at all costs. They associated tans with hard, manuel labor. Then, some fasion bimbo went on a fasionable safarii to get some fasionable furs, or whatever. When she came back, 'lo and behold, she had a tan. This resourceful young vanguard of fasion decided to cover her extreme embarassment by acting like she meant to horribly damage herself. And because she was the head fasion bimbo, everyone agreed that the look was definitly "in". So, everyone went to the beach and got tans. Girls began wearing skimpier, and skimpier bathing suits. Men, of course, had no complaints. (Though whether it was the tan or the skimpy suits, no one will ever know.) As you read this Historicly Accurate Anecdote, you must realize the parallel between it and the fable The Emperoro's New Clothes. Someone did something incredbly stupid, but because they were powerful, everone acted like it was a stroke of genius. And the preceding generations became brain-washed (possibly through subliminal messages in sun-tan lotion commercials) to believe tans were expected. Those few who actually could think and avoided the sun were considered to be outcasts. I don't mean to insult you if you DO have a tan. I am simply explaining why I, personally, refuse to swim, go to the beach, sunbathe, leave the house, etc. Alrighty then. I'm gonna quit for now. I'm back. I'm so very, very tired. School has been on for four days now. I have three very hard academic classes. They give lots and lots of homework. Two and a half hours of homework (total) to be precise. I get home from work at 5:30p.m. and eat dinner. Then I do my homework. I get done at 9:15. Then I wait for my mom and dad to stop playing Collapse II so that I can get on. I usually have less than 30 minutes. It sucks. I can't really work on this site even though I now have a more in depth understanding of variables. I learned this from my calculator. I made a virtual pet for it. It was fun. I'm tired. Did I mention that, yet. My calculator is nifty. Sometimes, it is lazy. It tells me stuff like: "Warning: More Solutions May Exist" and "Questionable Accuracy". So...it doesn't bother to find all solutions, and it may be wrong. Geee....that is comforting. I love my calculator, though. It does all my Math for me. I hate Math. Math is so picky. In English, and stuff, if you miss one little detail, at most you lose partial credit, but you usually get it all right. In Math, one teeny, tiny little mistake will make you get the entire thing wrong. I tend to make those tiny mistakes, and get bad grades, even if I understand the concepts. I hate Math. I'm tired. Are you tired. I sure am. Guess what I wanna do. How did you ever guess? That's right, I wanna sleep. Why can't I? Hmmmm...good question. I think I'm so tired I can't sleep. Plus...I gots oblimagations...obligaton....obligations to this site. yeah. thats it...i so tired...bye-bye. I'm back. And more than slightly embarassed. Today my frazzled-brain produced something that is decidedly Jenny (that's my more or less "real" name). I was contemplating how my heavy load of books made me like a bulldozer and than I was about to suggest to my friend, "Meg" that we invent one. Then I realized that the buldozer already HAD been invented. That's how I knew it's name, picture and what it did. That is just...pathetic. School is taking its toll. *sigh* *sniffle* *snort* *insert word that is a sound that begins with an "s" here* I don't have much time, so, I must be brief. I'm not sure how I CAN be brief since I have absolutly nothing to say. The best way to be brief is to quit now. Right now. Which is what I'm about to do. Any miniute now. I promise. Okay. Bye! *sigh* My dogs are just weird. You remember my Moose's arch-enemy, don't you? You know, the small, white feather. Well, my squirell now has an arch-enemy. At least her's makes sense...sort of. Her enemy is a fake Yorkshire Terrior (same species as her) made entirely out of goat hair. She HATES and FEARS it. She'll shake and run from it, then suddenly dive and bite it's head. She goes crazy if someone holds it, 'cause it's getting attention and not her. I'm fairly certain she knows it's not alive, though. Maybe she just doesn't like goat-smell. In any case, she is clearly insane. Just like everyone else in my family. In other news, I participated in the Second Battle of the Asparagus Wars and chronicled them here. I'll add a link to the main page when I get around to it. It gave me new insight into how weird I am. I fought with vegitables, covered myself in bubble wrap, groveled before the Great Banana and dodge skittles and flying doughnuts and rubber chikens. The entire message board was like one big insane asylum. Needless to say, I felt right at home. Well, seeya *waves brightly* I got to go to my Grendel (really cool book) project for school. I's making fake soundtracks like the teacher told me! BYE!!! Okay...I'm back. Today's rant is a panic rant. There are not going to be conspiracies...or humor of any kind. I think. *let the panic begin!* IT'S NOT FAIR! Why do I have to work year round? I only signed up for a semester. I was looking forward to having A elective, while everyone else was enjoying three or four...or even more. Oooo..I'm a poet, and don't I know it? In any case...it's awful. It's bad enough to go to school, leave school, go to work, leave work, do homework and then wait for my dad to get off of the computer so that I can do stuff. I want SOME free time. That's all. Is that too much to ask? I spend from 8-5 doing what everyone else wants. When is it MYturn? Next semester will be almost exactly like this one. Even though my schedule is technically supposed to be completly differnt. You see, my school has "block" scheduling. That means I take four classes this semester and four different classes next year. But one of my classes is work, and two others are horrible year-round classes. So next semester I'll still have work, AP Lit, and AP Physics. It's not FAIR. Physics is so FREAKIN' hard! I don't understand it. I have no problem with Lit. Okay. Work. I love my work, I love the kids I work with. But I HATE spending three hours of every day in a "class" when everyone else's class is only an hour and a half. I don't care if I have to ride the bus home if I stop work. I don't care if I'd get home only an hour or so before I normaly do. I want an elective. Maybe. I think. All I know is that I've been assuming one thing while the person in charge has been assuming a completly different thing. Neither of us thought to question the other. And so I'm in deep doo-doo. *sniffle* I just want to have some FREAKIN' variety in my daily grind, you know? I don't WANT to do the same thing for an entire year. Yeah, I know, regular schedule schools do that. I pity them, I really do. I've spent the past three years of my life EXPECTING each semester to be like a mini-year. I DO NOT LIKE CHANGE! This is just way too much of a change at once. I don't want year-round classes. I don't want a full year of work. I don't want to be in this mess...I'm going to bed. I'm back. I don't have much of a choice about the whole work thing. Plus, the kids at the daycare (where I work, obviously) say that I'm "cool to talk to". That makes me feel alll warm and fuzzy inside. Like a muffin. They just like how I know lots of pointless laws and random facts. Okay. ON TO THE CONPIRACY OF THE DAY!: I've had this nagging fear that I am part of some random but vast conspiracy (about what I'm not sure but it must be vast). Meanwhile there is a vast conspiracy at school to keep me ignorant about my pawn roll in the other vast conpiracy by keeping me vastly bored. (In a very vast sense) And: did you ever notice that the word "conspiracy" is vastly similar to the word "constipation". I only mention this 'cause I've accidently spelled constipation instead of conspiracy a few times. (on accident, vast number of times) Hee-Hee! Isn't vast a funny word? You can just picture sterotypical pirates saying, "A vast ye mateys!". I'm not exactly sure what that means, but it sure is funny:) You don't agree? Shame on you! Code: 888 of The Flaming Chickens Handbook states that The Patron Saint of Paperclips (still me) is always right. ALWAYS. If the facts beg to differ, than the facts are wrong. End of story. Seeya. I'm back. I've been playing one of the new neopets slot machines (black pawkeet). I'm completly and totally addicted. Gambling is so much fun! I've won 500 np, at least and I'm on a roll. Now sure, I could have won more than 500 at some game in which you don't have to pay to play. But, what would be the fun in that? I even came up with a mathematical explanation for why gambling is fun (while I was eating a hyper-speed dinner, thinking nothing of getting back to the slot machine). Okay. If you don't understand the concept of numbers less than zero, (negative numbers) just skip this part. Imagine a number line that points in the positive and negative direction. When I start playing a game, I am on 0. I have neither won nor lost money/neopoints. When I win 500np on a normal game, I move to the 500 point. There is exactly 500 units of distance between the two extremes of winning amounts (0 and 500) BUT! When I play a gambling game, there is a possibility that I'll lose everything, so I start on negative however much NP I have with me. If I had 500np with me, I'd be at-500. Then, when I win 500 additional np, I move to the 500np point. The distance between the two extremes of how much I could have won is 1000np, making me feel like I've won much more than if I'd played a normal game. Did you understand that? Good. I probably won't later. But that is irrelevant. Goodbye! I am back. And I hava a very, almost special rant for you. The previous sentence made absolutly no sense. Good for it. In a recent article, humorist Dave Barry discussed the addictive quality of the snack food, Cheez-Its. Naturally, I had many mixed feelings, primarily disgust, as I have not voluntarily eaten a Cheez-It in quite some time. They're disgusting, bland and definitly not made of cheez, whatever that is. My family has always bought Cheez-Its, to the point of making me physically sick at the thought of eating one. (To this day, however, I will almost literally kill for a box of Cheez-It party mix, as it is a rare commodity at my house.) Fortunatly, my mom recently finnaly switched our snack food preference. To Cheese Nips. Say it. Out loud. What does it sound like? When you look at them they are identical to the evil little Cheez-Its. The only difference is the taste, which I enjoy, since it is new and different. What I want to know is this: are there no intelectual property rights in the world of food products? I mean, don't you think the creators of Cheese-Nips had a box of Cheez-Its out when they were designing their product? It seems like blaggerent plagerism. The only reason the makers of Cheese-Nips don't get sued is because of the tast difference and Cheese Nips are made of real "cheese" rather than cheez. It makes you think of Name-Brand vs. Generic cereal brands. They are the samething, with the same look, and almost same name. But people buy name brands. Why, because they assume it's better quality. Plus, boxes are more convient than bags. A profound statement, if I ever heard one. Any way, I'm leaving to eat some Cheessy goodness! I'm back. Apparantly my standards of weird have gone up. This morning, my Mom came home from work. She was upset, because she had accidently run over an armidillo. She said she hurt it the first time, and wanted to put it out of it's misery, so she went back and ran over it 11 more times. But it's legs were still moving and it was alive. She was extremly upset. When I related this story to my friends (including "Meg") they thought it was hilarious. They couldn't stop laughing. I thought it was sad...and normal. They particularly liked how I said that she went back and ran over it 11 more times. I'm not sure why. Of course, when I next saw my Mom, she retold the story to me, several times. With the exact same words, motions and emotions. She didn't think it was weird, either. Perhaps my family is just so weird, we've lost all sense of perspective. Or maybe it's everybody else that's weird. I just don't know. What do you think, Hypothetical Reader? You don't know either? Hmmmmm...what is this world coming to? Oh, by the way, I was paid a decent compliment today. One of my friends (who laughed at the armidillo story) named Tonileigh said "Jenny (that's me) is weirder than the average Psycho." and " You think Jenny's weird? Wait till you see her in angry mob form!" Now THAT'S just weird. "angry mob form"? That just sounds nifty! I can clone myself and form and angry mob? In anycase, this was particularly funny because Tonileigh is one of my "normaler" friends. Although I tell you she can't possibly be normal, since she hangs out with me. Anyway, I'm gonna go. I gots stuff to do! I'm back. If you'll look toward the bottom of this page, you'll notice that I added a nifty little thing called the "babel fish". It will translate any thing, to anything else. Ain't it nifty? What's really fun is to translate an English saying, like out of sight, out of mind. Then, when it's in German, or whatever, translate it back to English. It's so completly garbled, it's funny. For instance, I wrote: "I am the Crazy Taco!", and translated it to German. I then copied and pasted the German and put it in the text box. I translated it from German to English and got "I am the Moved Taco!" See? Hours of completly useless fun! This has been my hourly Public Service Announcement that I only do when I feel like it. Seeya! I'm back! Woooo! And do I ever have a topic today! I've been a paranoid, conspiracy seeking mood lately and the newest threat to my sanity is: smoke detectors! Come on, think about it! In all those 911 shows, people wake up and their house is engulfed in flames. The smoke detector either never went off, or went off and the people just slept through it. Okay, fire is loud. And hot...and smoky. If you can sleep through a raging fire, close enough to set off the smoke detector, then you are definitly going to sleep through the smoke detector. Plus, the fire gradually gets louder, and hotter, and smokier. The sleeping person will gradually get used to it (and incorporate it into their dreams). By the time the smoke dector goes off, the fire has drowned it out to no more than an annoying buzz. My point is that smoke detectors have very little value in home security. Okay, one day, in the future, smoke dectectors will probably activate litte fire-fighter bots that every home will have. But untill that day, the concept of the smoke detector is useless. If you're awake to hear it, chances are that you've already noticed the smoke, fire and eminent danger. If you're asleep, the fire will wake you. So, that leads us to the evil paranoid conspiracy I thought of the other night. What if the smoke detectors have tiny litte cameras in them? That would explain that annoying green little blinkie light in them. Unless, of course, the government was smart enough to have cameras without the blinkie light. In any case, wouldn't the blinkie light help night-vision cameras see in the dark? It only takes a little light to help those thingies, and smoke detectors provide more than a little. I can even see the shadow of my hand on the wall from the light those things shed. It's annoying. Here I am, trying to get a decent nights sleep and there's this green light that periodically blinks to red directly in front of me. It's a small light, but it's sooooooo annoying. There MUST be some sort of conspiracy involved, 'cause if there is, I can get rid of the EVIL thing! So, fellow conspiracy nuts: Take down the evil governmental safety device and take it apart. If you can still think during all that incessent beeping, you'll probably find evidence that I'm really paranoid. Or possibly right...that would be scary. In any case...I guess that smoke detectors are a neccesary evil...but...WHY DO THEY HAVE TO HAVE THAT STUPID LIGHT? Does it serve an obvious purpose? No! That's why it MUST be EVIL! You cannot deny the logic of my thinking! Now...I'm gonna go and worry about the light on my toaster oven...seeya! *sighs dramatically* I'm back. It's not fair, ya know? Each Friday, I wait (all tingly with anticipation) for the weekend so that I can stay up 'till the wee hours of the morning and sleep past noon. But my idiotic body has an automatic alarm clock, or something. During the weekdays, I get about seven hours of sleep (usually less) and wake up at 6:11 a.m. Yep. Now, some of you are probably calling me a whiner, 'cause you have to get up at 4:30, or whatever. And lots of you are probably gloating 'cause you don't have to get up 'till 8:30. The reason I have to get up at 6 something is that I...I...I ride the bus to school. Yeah...I know...pathetic. (Believe me, though, you never want to see me drive...I get easily distracted by clouds and signs saying FREE KITTIES!...kitties are hugable...but if you hug them...they'll scratch your eyes out...so then you have to hiss at them and establish dominence...but kitties don't like that...even though dogs do...but kitties are obviously not dogs...even though they are fuzzy.) So...my lack of a car and driving skills force me to use the bus, which comes for me 45 minutes before my school even starts. It's stupid. It only takes me a few minutes to get ready, then I can go back to bed. Now...I bet you're wondering why I don't just wake up a few minutes before I have to go. My sister. My evil, EVIL sister. That's why. She's evil. SHE has to get up at 6:11 to put on make-up, do her hair and basically annoy the heck out of me. So rather than battle her over the concept of getting dressed in the dark, I get up. Oh...I'm rambling again, aren't I? Back to the original topic! So...when the weekend rolls around, I'm fairly exhausted. But, my stupid internal alarm clock is starting to wake me up around six. I can usually fall back asleep (if I don't panic and think I'm late for school), but the stupid thing wakes me up again exactly seven hours after I originally fell asleep. Which is why it's not even 10:00 and here I am, typing. Which I suppose may be a good thing, seeing as how I'm currently in a Longest Text Ever Rivalry with Galaxy Dreamer's site. *cough*She's winning*cough* But that's just because I have so much to do to mantain and update this site, I rarely get a chance to just sit here and type. Oh, and I would like to mention to my *snicker* LOYAL fans that this Longest Text Ever DOES get updated at least once a week, so please, please, please, PLEASE do not read this once, in one sitting and then leave forever, and ever and ever! It makes me sad...*sniffle* Well...I feel better now. Did you know that I now possess a DOMAIN NAME? Yep. That's right! It'll be ready soon, ain't it great? Okay, back to the flaming-chickens LTE rivalry. Another reason why this isn't as long as Galaxy's is that I refuse to write every day as it would--this is the funny part--LOWER THE QUALITY OF MY OVERALL WORK! HA-HA! HILARIOUS! "lower the quality"? Sometimes I crack myself up. If this was quality work, I'd publish it and make a fortune. Speaking of publishing, I do plan on somehow, someday publishing this as the first rambling narrative that makes no sense, and is about as interesting as rereading the almanac. I'd probably lose money, but the concept is interesting. I think. Anyway, I better go or the quality of this will go down in that evil downward spiral thing I discussed a few months back. Seeya. I'm back. Wooooo! I's can get to my site again! It was down for a whole day or so 'cause of all the traffic I got from my new quizes. I have an extra-special rant for you all today, to celebrate the new domain name! www.flaming-chickens.com! Okay. I am now barophobic (afraid of gravity). I recently learned in my EVIL Physics class that on average, humans lose one inch of height during the day due to gravity pushing on their spine. The height is regained at night, when you're laying down. This naturally alarmed the HECK out of me! GRAVITY IS EVIL! It's pushing down on me, squishing my spine. MY SPINE IS SQUISHY! That's is just so extremly creepy. What if, eventually, Earth's gravity get's very very strong, and we all imploud from the squishyness? It'd be like when you go to the bottom of the ocean, only with gravity instead of pressure...*shudders* Pressure is evil, too. Air pressure. Did you know that there is over two miles of air sitting on you right now? Even though air is light, that much air adds up. TWO MILES? Even the air is conspiring to squish me! If you don't believe that all that air has weight, try going into space sometime. Space is notorious for not having air. When you're in space (without a space suit) you don't SUFFUCATE, you don't FREEZE. You exploud. Since all that nifty air isn't pressin' on you, your guts and stuff are free to go wherever they want, and the EVIL little things decide to roam around. Outside your body. It's creepy. So...air pressure can be a good thing. Even though it gains pleasure from squishing my spine. That's it, I'm gonna take drastic measures! I'm gonna launch THE OFFICIAL FLAMING CHICKENS LUNAR COLONY! The moon has one-sixth of Earth's gravity. And absolutly NO air-pressure. We can all wear spiffy space-suits and feel all superiour to all those stupid earthlings. So...if you wish to contribute to this great and magneficent and magestic and MOOSEY project...we need the following things: 739 rolls of aluminium foil (preferably the extra shiny kind) 417 refridgerator boxes, 9000 rolls of "sticky on both sides" duct tape, 300 lbs of chicken feathers (preferably white) and 1 (one) thermo-nuclear-rocket-thruster. If you can spare any of these items, please e-mail them to me. Yes. E-mail. Did you really think I'd give you guys my ADDRESS? Now...I know what you guys are thinking...some of those items on that list are gonna be hard to find. Especially that duct tape. But, believe me, it's MUCH more practical than the alternative. What is the alternative, you ask? I'll tell you. Making me(The Patron Saint of Paperclips) the Ruler of the Laws of Nature! That way I can just outlaw the need for gravity and air pressure! I'm already half way there, since I conclusivly proved (in Physics class) that gravity actually causes things to slow down and EVENTUALLY GO UP! Sure, my TEACHER said that was because I was doing the problems wrong, but once I'm the Ruler of the Laws of Nature, I'll change the problems so that I'm right! Oooo! I thought of another very good reason to assist with the Official Flaming Chickens Lunar Colony! As we all know, the world is going to end in about 380,695 days! This means that we only have a very short while to prepare. And I sugest that we build the rocket so that we can go to the Official Flaming Chickens Lunar Colony so that we can laugh at the stupid earthlings who are blowing up because they didn't listen to us when we tried to warn them about the impending doom! Once we are on our Lunar Landing Site, we will engage in many exciting activites, primarily related to suffucating and starving. If (and this is a big if) the world DOES survive, we can beg them for food, oxygen and other supplies. They'll probably just call us weird and laugh at us, but that's beside the point! I can even see the Official Flaming Chicken Rocket. It'll be covered in chicken feathers, and shaped like a chicken. The foil will make up the beak and the folded legs, and the thruster can simulate the tail. It will be a truly magestic site, as it launches from the earth, spewing excess oxygen, cardboard, feathers and tape. But, act now, or it will be too late, and you will be one of the losers that we'll be laughing at, assuming we have air to laugh with. Remember, e-mail psopc@flaming-chickens.com the much needed supplies...if that is possible. If not, then some day, when the Internet is down and I'm really bored, I will construct a model OFCR and attempt to launch it. That will be a wonderous day. I think I'll get my little sister to be the test piolet. Well...better go...I need to plan this out more...I'm back. And mildly weirded-out. My dad...was on this site. My dad. It even SOUNDS weird. He took the TAB member quiz and turned out to be me, he took the JOB quiz, and was a repo man (which had a pic of my brother) He said he wanted to see what I was doing, and to make sure that I wasn't saying anything derrogatory about my parents. He looked me upvia yahoo's search engine using flaming-chicken as the keyword. It took him to my quiz page. So he probably didn't see the majority of my site. It's just weird. All along, my entire family has scoffed (nifty word, isn't it?) about my site, and called me weird. I dunno...I guess I'm just kinda freaked out. Oh, and don't forget to celebrate Mad Hatter Day on October the 6th. Seeya. I'm back. I had some conspriacy or another to rant about. But then I listened to some of the new music I put on my site and mellowed out. I can't remember what I was gonna rant about. Oh, yeah. Now I do. "Purified" water. Just wait a sec while I stop the music. *content sigh* There we go...that's much better. Now I can think. That's right, folks. "Purified" water. Now...just stop a second and contemplate that. Pure means, well, no extra stuff. 100% of something. Right? Well, next time you buy your $3 FREAKIN' dollar bottle of water, consider this. On almost all the "purified" water bottles I've ever seen it has the following mesage: "Purified through reverse osmosis. Minerals added for a pure, fresh taste." In other words, they take all that extra "stuff" out to make it pure. Then they add other "stuff" in to make it TASTE pure. But it's not. For all you, the uninformed consumer, could know, it might have rat poison in it. "Pure" water manufactuerers are not required to list the ingredients of water, because the average consumer believes that it should be obvious. But that is false! They add random minerals to our water to make it taste better, and then advertise it as pure! It's an outrage! I'd rather drink the "impure" tap water where at least I KNOW that someone, somewhere tested it. It's a law, I think. But does anyone test "pure" water? Most likely they test it BEFORE they add the extra stuff..."Yep, Bob, this is some mighty pure water." "Yep, Bill, time to dump the arsnic in so it tastes pure!" What kind of reasoning is that? Wouldn't pure water TASTE pure, and impure water TASTE impure? The insanity and stupidity is mind boggling! That's why I like fast-food salt. It actually lists what random minerals they through in to make it TASTE like salt. There's salt, of course, and aluminum sulfate, and other compounds. But the point is, if I were, say, freakily allergic to a random mineral, I could read the ingredients and not eat the salt. That's what they need to do with the water. Or, at the very least, not label it as "pure". Okay. That's the rant of the week, month, year, whatever. I'll probably have another one soon, but that whole water thing has been buggin me for awhile. Well...seeya! Er...yeah...I'm back. It's been awhile, (at least two weeks) since I've written here. I've been obsessed with various webcomics, creating the stupidly long new Phobia Quiz and being maniacly hysterical about my site always being down due to bandwith issues. I'm goin' light on the advertising at the moment, which is why I'm free to write here. I WANT to write. But I can't think of anything to write about. Typical. I finnaly get some free time to rant and rave and all my topics just magically melted away. Let's see...what have I ranted about before, subliminal messages, vast breakfast cereal conspiracies, water, uh...reality tv? And that's just what I can list from memory. Oh, yeah! How could I forget the stupid Tootsie Roll Pop Commercials? TACO is still in my heart. *sighs*...now...let's see...what to rant about today... ... ... ... ... I can't think of anything!? Is this writer's block?! Or maybe I just wanna go to bed. Sleeping is fun. Well...let's see. Did you know that statistics prove that 45% of all statistics are completly made up by me (The Patron Saint of Paperclips)? Well...they are. Ha! I see you have no reaction to that, do you Hypothetical Reader? I have once again caused that explody sensation in your brain meats! You cannot DEFEAT me! I rule the...er...*random Loyal Minion whispers in ear* That's right! I rule the Internet! The Official FLaming-Chickens Handbook already confirms that fact! You CANNOT DENY it! It says that in black and...er lime green! It MUST be true! Because it is in those veyr colors that the Matrix is programmed! Ahhh...I see your confusion! You cannot follow the vast, mind-boggling logic that is ME! Wait...how...how can I BE logic? That doesn't make any sense...you can't BE something abstract...can you? Now MY brain meats feel explody. That's not fair! I see your EVIL plot now, Hypothetical Reader! You just let me rant on and on for you KNEW that eventually I would confuse myself with my vast puddle of knowledge. You are devious...I give you that. Unfortunantly...I must leave...before the confusion spreads and I do something stupid...like revealing my one weakness before you...THAT'S IT! Code 452 of the Flaming Chickens Handbook states that the Patron Saint of Paperclips (ME!!!) does not, has never, and will absolutly NOT admit to having any weakness...besides the aformention indivduals own skin, which isn't even a weakness anyway since no representative of the Dark, Fluffier Side can BE the Patron Saint of Paperclips (Guess, who...no...no...THAT'S IT!) and even if they could it wouldn't do them any good because it would scare them instead of the aformentioned individual. Boy...I really enjoy confusing myself!:) Seeya! I'm baaaaa-ack! Aren't you happy? Here, see if you can find the super-secret message!

While you wait for yesterday's tomorrow, lunge back and remember that day.  You know the one.  Yeah, this doesn't mean anything to you.  Are you surprised?  Obviously not.  Answer me, you blobby looking freak! Or suffer my blindingly moronic nail messages.
Did you find it? Wasn't it super? And secret? I thought it was. But then, I'm me...and you're you. I think. I'm pretty sure you're not me...but you could be that other guy. Yeah...that...guy...you know who I'm talking about. No? Do not MOCK me! I know where you are right now! Spooky, huh? Ooooo...time for today's topic. My favorite stuff...JTHM...I have my libraries copy of JTHM...I shall quote Noodle Boy for you:) (Full copyright/credit to Jonhnen Vasquez for writin' the stuff, I'm just sharing the spleeny goodness with you). (it's edited, of course, to stay PG13...**** signifies a random naugty word:)) "HEY, DOG ENTITY! RISE UP AND BARE YOUR BISCUIT FILTY FANGS AT THE LEASH WIELDING DEMON!! **** MY NAVEL ITCHES!! MEOW!MEOW!MEOW! CAT CHOW!!! CEASE YOUR FLATULENT WINDS AND HEAR MY MIND NUMBING EXPULSIONS OF WICKED NOISE! GRRR!! CHEESE!!! I SENSE YOUR ENVY OF MY NECK!! AND I DONT BLAME YOU!! DROOOOOL OVER MY MAGICAL POWERS!! I HAVE POWERS PINTO BEANS CAN ONLY DREAM OF! WANNA SEE ME PULL A TAPEWORM OUTTA MY ****!! HUH?!...STARE DEEP INTO THE STINKING ABYSS OF MY INDIVIDUALLY WRAPPED SLICES!!! HOLY WAX! CHECK OUT MY ARMPITS!!! HEEEEY! WAIDAMINIT!! WAIT JUST A POLYP PICKING MINUTE!! I SEE YOUR GAME! YOU WILL NOT SINK MY CHEERIO!! I SEE WHAT IS TRANSPIRING HERE!!! YOU'RE ALL ZOMBIE THIGH-FAT PEOPLE BROUGHT INTO ANIMATION BY SOME EVIL FORCE OF FORCEFUL EVIL!!! **** THAT LIPSTICKS THE WRONG COLOR FOR YOU!! MOOOO! WOOF! OH, DON'T YOU SEE THE TOENAILS?!! OH, SO SPLENDID!! A,B,C,D,E,F,G,H,I,J,K...! UNDER SUCH EXTREME HEAT, WEAR AND DEGRADATION IS INEVITABLE!! PARTS BREAK AFTER OVERUSE!! AND THAT IS WHY TOASTER PASTRIES WILL BURST INTO FLAMES IF YOU DON'T KEEP AN EYE ON THEM! Now, wasn't that entertainment. I added to the lenghth of the LTE without even thinking! That's talent. Lots of gooey talent. Unfortunatly, I once again am devoid of a topic. And any weirdness I could come up with would be normal compared to Noodle Boy, so...I bid thee farewell...seeya! I'm back. And I've realized that I am a complete idiot. For an ENTIRE MONTH I have possesed the arcane knowledge, but I forgot to share it with you, my loyal potentially imaginary reader. I know. You're shocked at my selfish, bad, memory. I apologize from the depths of my moosey soul. For, you see...my life long goal has been fufilled...*anticipatory silence*...THERE ACTUALLY IS GRAPE PIE!!!! I know...you are as shocked as I am. One day I was randomly looking up images via Google...and 'lo and behold, there it was. Grape Pie. It was as if it had been just sitting there...waiting for me to discover it. Apparantly Grape Pie isn't mainstream, but it has existed for some time. In obscure cookbooks. Well...that just makes me filled with gooey happiness. Of course, there is also regret...after all, I could have made a fortune if I'd been the first to think of it. Oh, well. There was something else I had to tell you loyal *cricket chirps, someone coughs* fans. I can't remember what. I guess I'll just rant and rave about that whole vicious downward spiral of my writing. I mean, I KNOW people are coming here...I have proof! *holds up a piece of paper, which, from a distance, appears to have writing on it* Yes, undenyable proof! But this proof degrades this mysterious, mystical and mystifying "quality" of my words. After all, how can I be self derisive, and full of low expectations for this site if I KNOW people are here...several thousand of them in fact, in just a few months. It's strange. I felt more fufilled when this site was a barren wastland of useless space. But, if it had remained that way, I would have had no impetus to continue my pointlessly insane ranting. Oh, speaking of insane, I STILL need those much needed supplies for the Official Flaming-Chickens Lunar Colony! No one has even bothered to e-mail them to me...*sniffle*. I needs the duct tape! How can I survive without the sticky goodness? HOW, I ask you!? It cannot be...hmmmm...maybe I should just use IMAGINARY duct tape...it's easier to come by ,but it's much more expensive...I'm not sure what to do. *enter Squirell* What's that, little Squirell? That's just silly. You KNOW I ran out of imaginary money last week when I bought that imaginary country. WHAT!? Just "imagine" I have more!? What a crazy idea. So crazy it just might work! *scrunches eyes and makes funny sounds* Nope. It didn't. I guess I'll just have to wait untill my imaginary clone hijacks that imaginary bank truck. Until then...I have absolutly no imaginary money. What ever shall I do? I won't be able to feed my various imaginary pets and friends their beloved imaginary food! Squirell? You gots extra money, don't you? *nods* I thought so. You give to me? No? I gives you imaginary IOU's...here...yours. Thank you Squirell. *Squirell wanders off in search of electrical sockets to sniff* What's that, Hypothetical Reader? You don't know who Squirell is? You haven't been paying attention have you? She's my little puppy...she fears grape flavored stuff, wind, rain, television, noise, silence, small children and pretty much everything. She likes sniffing potentially dangerous stuff, like electrical sockets. Surely you have heard of her? Still no? Oh, well. You know...I enjoy having these conversations with you. It really lets me get to know you. What's that? You say I'm really just talking to myself? What an eccentric idea! To think, YOU are trying to tell ME that YOU aren't here. How absurd. After all, I'm talking to you, aren't I? *nods* Well, yeah...I KNOW I'm actually typing instead of talking. Wait a minute...so you're saying that I'm talking and responding to you, but you won't be reading this until long after I have finished typing? Now who's the crazy one? For that theory to work, I'd have to be psychic...or in possesion of a freaky time-traveling computer. Because what you're saying is that I'm talking to people in the future. That my words somehow travel accross time (if only a few minutes) and are somehow picked up by future you, and that my responses are dictated by future you's reactions. What? You mean that I'm just randomly responding regardless of your reactions? Why, that would be insane, wouldn't it? That's the point you're trying to get across? *pauses* Oh. I see. You wanna play that way. Well...two can play by THOSE rules. You wanna try to convince me I'M crazy? Well, look at you? How do you know I even exist? For all you know you could be staring at that freaky 3-D maze screen saver with a blank look on your face while you THINK you're reading an inhumanly long text. For all you know, you could be halucinating my entire site! For that matter, how do you know that ANYTHING but you exists! You could be floating out in empty space, conjuring nice little fantasies to relieve the monotony of being the only living being! Every single person you know could just be figments of your imagination, you could even be in a crazy house! Not only that, but how do you know that YOU actually exist? You could be the figment of someone else's dream. What would happen when that dreamer woke? Are you happy? You got me started. I may NEVER shut up. I'll just go on and on about how crazy you COULD be. All because YOU tried to convince me that I was crazy. *blinks* And I STILL can't remember what else I was gonna say to you people. Strange, huh? Well, I better leave before I go on and on about more "reality" theories. Makes you wonder about "reality" television, huh? Seeya. I'm back. Grrrr...I had a nifty rant all planned out in my head. And then I was unable to get on the computer and I forgot most of it. Oh, but I did remember what else I wanted to say to you people. Remember that rant I did on how there could be a secret camera in the smoke detector? I few months ago I saw a movie about that. It was pretty good. Maybe I'd seen it before, and that's where I got the idea. I forgot it's name. Well...I DO have a special treat for you weirdos who apparantly like wasting time! Today, in my (Honors) English class, we did group work. My group...well...we either went hysterical or crazy, I can't decide which. We had to do an essay on a book. There was a sample essay online. It sucked. It tooked about envelooping (enveloping) cracked nuts and parables. So we were already off to a bad start. Here is the sum total of my group's work. (Note: I wrote virtually none of this, so I cannot be blamed, credited with any of this. "Lots of death, lots and lots of death in this section. Death is like life in that after you die some things start life again inside of you. 'Ah the power of cheese!' The author's vision was unique in that only he put biscuits and death in the same sentence. 'I found nothing else to do but to offer him on of my good Swede's ship's biscuits I had in my pocket'" And we're supposed to be GOOD in English! We KNEW how terrible it was, but we just didn't bother to change it. Especially the part about the biscuits and cheese. We just picked random words in the selection and wrote about them. It was sad. In any case, I hope you enjoyed our patheticness. Seeya! I'm back. Today I will be mercifully brief. I am here to bring AWARNESS to your moosey soul! Right now, while you are sitting in your "chair" and eating your "junk food", millions of almonds are commiting suicide. Yes...that's right...suicide. I was alerted to this growing problem in our world community by (Kat, the ruler of all that is almondy)...and it greatly concerns me. People just don't realize that their almonds and mixed nuts may be having depression and other problems. We need to act now! For more information, e-mail EnpuUnknown@msn.com Well...seeya! I'm so very, very tired. Today was Halloween. I worked for four hours at the "Library of Terror" sponsered by TAB. TAB members got pizza...lots of pizza...and candy. Ugh. It was fun, but exhausting. I was almost completly covered in (fake) blood...it was sticky toward the end. One guy was a "shock therepy" patient...he was a good actor. He acted like he was really being tortured and stuff. I'm tired. I bet you couldn't tell. Why am I writing? Because this is the first time I've been on a computer all day. You can't blame me. Don't worry, I'll go to bed soon. In the mean time, I'll just sit here and type with my eyes closed. It's hard to type because of the bandaid on my finger. I accidently cut it with scizzors. It hurt. The fake blood seeped into the open wound. Gee...I sure hope it wasn't poisonous. If so, I guess I won't be writing here for quite awhile...seeya. Okay, this next rant has nothing to do whatsoever with Halloween...which is to be expected because it's been several days since then. Anyway, today's rant is about one of my many and various pet peeves: fasion and...stuff. My definition of fasion includes clothes, shoes, jewelery and all things of that nature. Now, don't get me wrong. I can appreciate a spiffy black outfit as much as the next person, but everytime I consider actually buying clothes for aesthetic value, I think about how I could better spend my money. On video games. Sure, some of this "fasion" stuff is cool and all, but all it shows is that you had the three and three-quarters brain cells required to copy someone else's "look". And don't even get me started on earrings. My little, eviler sister got her ears pierced when she was relativly younger. My mom did it to her because it was free. OF FREAKIN' COURSE IT WAS FREE! Just like thos so called "diet supplements" that give you a "free" sample because they know that once you try it, you'll like it so much you'll spend oodles of cash on it. (There's probably drugs in it). Anyway, like the "diet supplement" people, the earring manufacturers KNOW that once they pierce you, you'll be hooked for life. *pauses* *groans* I'm sorry for that pun (pierced, hooked, getit?). AS soon as you're pierced, you have to buy "starter" earrings. Then you'll need an "extra" pair...for special occasions. Before you know it you'll realize that you need Christmas earrings, Halloween earrings, Valentine's Day earrings, St. Patrick's Day earrings, for crying out loud! You'll wear these "festive" earings for about a day and then abandon them in some dark cranny of your closet because you simply can't wear the same earrings two years in a row for heaven's sake! Then you'll see these cute little "days-of-the-week" earrings at the mall, and you'll just have to get a few sets, just in case you lose some. By the time you're eighty, you'll have enough ear jewelry to open up your own jewelry shop. Of course, you won't want to do that becuase you still need more earrings so people won't think you wear the same ones over and over again. When I think of how much money people WASTE on appearences, it makes me feel like projectile vomiting. If that's not a vast conspiracy, then nothing on this Earth is. Now, I'm not speaking from personal experience here. No one I know is that obsessed with earrings, it was just an example. (Although my mother does have a "earring tree".) Sure, certain members of my family do pay WAY to much attention to fasion, but that's just because of the expectations of society. I, being weird, am pretty much immune to such expectations. Except those specially formulated for weird-o's like me. If I were to suddenly convert this entrie site into a *shudders* Backstreet Boys fan site or something, you wouldn't be any more suprised than I would be if my brother woke up one day and suddenly realized that he's shallow. It's the same concept. (No, I don't like any of those creepy "pop" stars. I think that they should routinly die a slow, savage, agonizing death...I was just saying a random thing that I would never, ever do.) Well...any way...seeya! I'm back. And today's rant is a sort of philosophical one. It's about the (supposedly) infinite nature of the universe. Suprised? It's spiffy. You see, if the universe is indeed infinite, that means that literally EVERYTHING is possible, and in fact, is happening somewhere in the universe. Think about it. No matter how unlikely something is, if the universe is infinite, it's happening an infinite number of times. Think about that old saying about "If you gave an infinite number of monkeys an infinite number of typewriters, eventually they would reproduce the entire works of Shakespear". That makes complete and total sense! Anyone just randomly typing letters will eventually accidently write a word, right? Now think of 100 people typing randomly. You figure that one of those 100 people would actually have a coherent phrase. And one out of a million people would probably have a few sentences. So if you have an infinite number of people, some are going to have entire books of coherent stuff. And, you have to remember that because infinity is infinite, you can divide it an infinite number of times. Try it. If you have a decent graphing calculator, plug in the infinity symbol divided by anything, (even infinity). The answer is still infinity. Using my philosopy, that EVERYTHING exists because the universe is infinite...well...think about it. In some far off world, there are pokemon...there are an evil race of muffin like creatures, there is a world with ABSOLUTLY NO COMMERCIALS DURING TELEVISION! I know, unlikely, huh? But somewhere, it exists. Think about it. If the universe is infinite it would be crazy to think that we're alone. With an infinite universe, there are infinite possibilites. There ARE aliens. Not only that, but there are an infinite number of different kinds of intelligent life. Which means that there are an infinite number of worlds with humanoid life. (Think of the fake-looking Star Trek aliens). If there are an infinte number of worlds with human life, than there are an infinte number of worlds that have someone exactly like you, with only a few key differences. (Like alternate dimensions and stuff) So, there is a world where you are the creator of this Longest Text Ever. There is a world where you are a faerie. There is a world where you were never born. There is a world where you are a slave to your TOASTER OVEN. The possibilities are literally endless. Every fantasy the human mind has concieved exist at some place in the universe. There are an infinite number of worlds with Harry Potter. Think about it. I came up with this philosophy when I was in fifth grade. I'd tell it to my little brother as a bed time story. He always enjoyed it because it meant that somewhere, he was the Supreme Dictator of the Galaxy. That made him happy. He ignored the fact that he was also a 72 year old "sanitation engineer" somewhere. All the good possibilities effectivly cancel out the bad ones, leaving the sum total of you and your counterparts experiences as nothing. You don't have the best life of your counterparts, but you don't have the worst either. Because that would be impossible. There is always someone worse off and better off than you. Because there are an infinite number of people on either side of the spectrum. Confusing, huh? But that's the kind of thing I like. That also explains why normal stuff confuses me. I'm sure some so called "scientist" can prove all my theories wrong...but how? How do you PROVE something is not infinite? You'd have to find the end, of course. But how, may I ask, can you find the end of the FREAKIN' universe? What, is there a giant sign saying, "DEAD END"? The universe is EVERYTHING, how can it end? At the same time, how can you prove something IS infinite? You could travel in a straight line at the speed of light for a million years and all you'd prove is that the universe is really, really big. But you'd never prove it was infinite. How could you? Our mind's cannot conceive of the vastness of infinity. We'd probably go crazier. In any case, my theory means that playing video games is very cruel. Why, you ask? Because in some world, the video game is real. So when you kill, or whatever, in the game, you are actually ending life somewhere in the universe. Of course, you also end life by sneezing, eating, sleeping, and watching T.V. According to my theory that everything is real. Of course, if everything is real...then the Universe is pretty contradictory. The paradox of my system of beliefs leads me to believe that the universe, in fact, is not infinite. Because nature supposidly abhors a paradox. Although, as I said, there's no way to prove me wrong OR right. That's what I like about making abstract theories... Anyway, sorry for the lack of relative weirdness, conspiracy theories and doughnuts (my Moose ate them all). Well...now that I think about it...according to my theory, ALL conspiracies are real and mislabled "paranoid" people are really the only ones who see the truth. *blinks* Wow...so I'm NOT paranoid. Who'da thought it? Well...better go before one of my two and half sane readers falls asleep:) Seeya! I'm back! Boy, are you mythical, mystical readers in for a treat, today! I have a guest rant/fake commercial written by "Meg" (who is once again banned from accessing the almighty Internet). Are you ready? No? Too Bad! The magic eight-ball glows with knowledge! With a shake, the future is revealed! The magic eight-ball is a plastic casing with an unknown, possibly toxic liquid inside. The future is determined by the triangles, in a startling blue color which spin around in a zany manner. Wheather you're saved or doomed, find out now! Is that old lady on the street corner really an ex-convict? Is fat-free food more delicious than food loaded with fat? Is your school playground a gateay to the underworld? All this information and more is yours for the low, low price of 5 payments of $29.99! And, if you call within the next ten minutes you get a free eight ball with the one you buy! But wait! There's more! Get the free Lil' Ball for your traveling needs! Warning: this product is illegal in most states) Wasn't that entertaining? "Meg" wrote it for a school assignment. We were supposed to write about a cherished child-hood toy, and attempt to turn our fond memories into a commercial. I wrote about furby, and how it was fun to watch it die. No, really. Somehow, I managed to make my furby die. It would sneeze, then start it's eight-hour-long death hum. It would hum, and hum, and hum...and then mercifully die. I don't exactly have a good track record with virtual pets. I once...*embarassed pause* had "Hey, You! Pikachu!"...a pokemon game. I'll only say that it was the first game you could "talk" to and was the first (and only) N64 virtual pet. Pikachu...well...he didn't like me. I gave him cupcakes, and presents, and did everything I could to befriend him! And what did he do to me? He snuck up on me one day in our room (in the game) with a sword! That's right, a sword! He tried to kill me! I heard something and turned around, and there he was! He even tried to hide the sword behind his back! When I tried to talk to him, he tossed it away nonchalantly and pretended he hadn't heard me. Then he preceeded to trash my room, scattering kleenex everywhere. I'm pretty sure that the "smelly yellow ball" that he started throwing was his own feces (poo). That dirty little rat. Awwww...isn't he cute? Hmmmm...I suppose I should clarify that the Pikachu game was 3-D and your character was in first person mode(you see through character's eyes). Otherwise you'd think I was delusional, or something. Everyone I know who has played that game is shocked when I tell them...oh, well. Speaking of virtual pets, I'm revamping the ones on this site. I've finnally figured out sorta, maybe, kinda, how to do stuff to make it more real. Anyway, seeya! OOooooo! I'm back, and I had yet another Asparagus War with some people. We made a guild, and I wrote out the transcripts of the first ever Asparagus War in narrative form (mock epic, very cheesey) Since it's very, very long, I'll post it here to meet my imaginary word quota for the day! Oh, and all those weird squiggly lines and symbols, those are supposed to be apostrophes, but neopet's code is weird, and I'm not gonna bother to edit it. Enjoy!

And, on the 15th day of the Month of August, in the year of our Lord 2003, at approximately 7:52 p.m. a great and wondrous battle was fought in the waste lands of the General Chat Room. â€˜Lo, and eon337 did wield the mighty Swiss-Asparagus, and did attempt to vanquish her foe, the Evil and Fluffy preggypreggy. Preggypreggy had tamed the fearsome Asparagus Sword, and many a foe had she slain with her valor. But behold! For the Swiss-Asparagus did slice, and dice and was capable of turning itself into julienne fries! And so it seemed that the two mighty warriors were evenly matched and that their struggle would never come to and end. They didst charge at each other with a terrible noise and clamor, and the skies did shake and the earth did tremble at the ferocity of their mighty blows! The stereotypical Asparagus Sword didst fail to hit its mark and eon337 did mock the Sword for itâ€™s falling.
Translation: On 8-15-03, 7:52 NST, eon337 and preggypreggy grabbed some Asparagus Themed weapons and fought. They made fun of each otherâ€™s weapons, and generally kept missing each other every time they swung. And eon337 did think long and ponderous and in so doing converted the puny Swiss-Asparagus into the mighty and powerful toothpick. And the masses did gleam the significance of this act and they were awed by the grace and cunning of the wooden speck. And preggypreggy was immune to the verbal slings and arrows of her foe, and refused to be disheartened by eon337â€™s dishonorable insults. Her claim being that function of a weapon is to be put before the ornate form. She endeavored to thwart eon337â€™s plans to defeat her with the great and wondrous toothpick. She didst again pummel the air with her sword, but in her enthusiasm her blows didst fall far from their mark. And the masses didst cheer for eon337 as she had impressed them greatly and they made the sounds of impressive wonder. Translation: Eon337 turned a perfectly good Swiss-Asparagus into a toothpick to gain the approval of the studio audience. The audience oooed and awed. Preggypreggy continued to swing wildly around, missing each time. She ignored eon337â€™s insult and said that at least her sword worked. And then a new challenger didst arrive at the arena and scoobychick6900 didst fling bowls of asparagus at the fighting mortal enemies. Preggypreggy appealed to the masses, but to no avail, and was heartily surprised when the asparagus did hit her. And â€˜Lo! The masses didst condemn scoobychick6900 loudly and vehemently and there was much rejoicing in the land. Preggypreggy didst fancy that she had perhaps met scoobychick6900 previously, and so did attempt to recollect when. Eon337 did take advantage of the lull in action and did attack preggypreggy with her finger. Preggypreggy did retaliate with the awe-inspiring SuperPoke, and eon337 was laid low upon the ground in agony. Translation: Scoobychick6900 showed up and threw bowls of asparagus. Eon337 poked preggypreggy, and preggypreggy poked back, harder. Eon337 was hurt. And with victory in her mighty vision, preggypreggy didst decide to reveal her secret weapon, and with a fancy hand movement, revealed the extent of her traitorous ways. For all know that the bagels and the doughnuts didst disband in ancient times of old. Preggypreggy, through her treacherous methods, had obtained the Flying Doughnut of Doom and didst endeavor to use it. Eon337 was readily prepared for such an occurrence and didst arm herself with mighty ear-shields, armor that didst repel all projectiles of metal, a head covering, and an outer covering of strange, transparent material that didst snap whence it was squeezed. Aragorns_cutie then didst show up with the almighty nemesis broccoli and an unnecessary sneer upon her countenance. _Radical_girl_ did break the protocol and didst claim to rather fight with cucumbers, and so it was done. And the masses rejoiced. And eon337 didst not hear the newcomers because of her mighty ear-shields, and didst offer the fighters dressings for their wounds. Translation: Preggypreggy revealed that she had a secret weapon from Ancient Times, although eon337 was prepared for it, with earmuffs, bulletproof armor, and bubble wrap. Two new fighters showed up and did random things. Eon337 offered Band-Aids. And aragorns_cutie didst laugh in a manic way, and didst wave the broccoli to and fro in a threatening manner. And eon337 did finally recognize the newcomers, and ask, neigh, commanded they give preggypreggy healing strips. And _radical_girl_ didst howl furiously and implored the fighters to meet their DOOOOOOOOM. And so hiamplidude didst come to the battle and didst posses the almighty Asparagus Cannon, and did thinkest himself invincible. Following himaplidude camst nemmisis_dude, who didst offer the warriors ponderous messages such as: THIS TRULY WORKS! POST THIS IN 10 DIFFERENT BOARDS AND YOU WILL FIND A BABY PAINTBRUSH WHEN YOU GO TO CHAT PREFERENCE AND 10000000000NPS! THIS TRULY WORKS, TRUST ME. And the warriors didst consider nemmisis_dude a profit, who was devoted to speaking in tongues so as to convey a message from the gods. And â€˜Lo! Nemmisis_dude didst reveal his Bow and Asparagus and the masses rejoiced. And eon337 didst intimidate her foes by snapping her transparent covering and shrieking that she was invincible. Translation: Random stuff happened, and more people showed up. Someone spammed the message board so people ignored it and eon337 went crazier And â€˜Lo! The writer of this cheesy epic didst realize that virtually every sentence begins with â€œandâ€, and the masses rejoiced. _radical_girl_ didsâ€™t chase random people with her broccolis, and didst miss in her mighty swings. Hiamplidude didst take out nemmisis_dude, and gloried in his honor and didst receive a spinach gun from the gods. . Preggypreggy was threatened by the randomness, and didst call her secret weapon, the Mighty Evil Flying Donut Of Doom! Eon337 realized preggypreggyâ€™s unprecedented treachery and didst cower in her impotence before one so Dark and Fluffy. And aragorns_cutie had ex-lax and _radical_girl_ didst covet invincibility and so did don a pool covering. Nemmisis_dude was revealed to be unharmed by hiamplidude, and didst fire at preggypreggy with an asparagus gun. But preggypreggy didst forget one thing: eon337 still possessed the support of the ignorant masses, which guaranteed her inevitable victory. And preggpreggy scoffed at eon337â€™s supposed advantage and didst claim that even the ravenous horde of the people didst not conceive of her one vulnerable point. And preggypreggy didst close her mind to the truth: the dark side is fluffy. Translation: Preggypreggy called the Flying Donut of doom and eon337 called preggypreggy a traitor. The newcomers did random tings, and eon337 reminded everyone that she still had the support of the studio audience. Preggypreggy refused to see it as an advantage, and refused to believe that she was on the Dark, Fluffier Side. And behold, for eon337 didst transform the Asparagus Toothpick into a Aspara-Launcher and didst call preggypreggy deceived in her way of thinking, for the Dark Side is always Fluffier. And preggypreggy didst call forth the creamed cheese from the bowels of the Evil Flying Donut of Doom and the masses did rejoice, and wallowed in the fattening substances that fell from the air like a gift of mana from the gods. And eon337 didst fire projectiles at preggypreggy and unexpectedly mimicked the holy Matrix in her cries of â€œDodge thisâ€. And neoshadow08 didst arrive and inquire as to whether rubber chickens were allowed, and the multitudes said yes. Preggypreggy, in her infinite wisdom, failed to see the connection between Darkness and Fluffiness, and was so forsaken by the masses. And greyratt didst claim to have invented a new, spookier type of asparagus that never caught on, and the multitudes rejoiced. Preggypreggy didst dodge the projectile, and gained honor amongst the masses. As the theological debate about the Dark, Fluffier Side raged on, the newcomers fought with the dung of dogs, the chickens of rubber and other such unorthodox weaponry as greyratt didst play with discarded asparagus. Translation: Some stuff happened here. No, really! Eon337â€™s toothpick became an Aspara-Launcher, and preggypreggy and eon337 argued about whether the Dark Side was Fluffy or not. Neoshadow08 and greyratt came, and did stuff. Preggypreggy released cream cheese from the Flying Donut of Doom. And eon337 didst revealth that she didst posses the Ultimate Asparagus Themed Weapon, too terrible to be named, oh, what the heckth, the name didst ring and was The Thermo-Asparagus-Nuclear-Weapon. And preggypreggy didst begin to crack under the strain of the Squeak of Death, and so in his infinite understanding, neoshadow08 didst remove the Squeak of Death and didst replace it with the Chic Attack. Aragorns_cutie didst protest the violence, and didst consume the flavorful tomato paste. And moonbeam998 didst come, a magical priestess full of arcane knowledge. Her mighty glance didst fall upon the warriors and she didst proclaim: THIS TRULY WORKS! POST THIS IN TEN DIFFERENT BOARDS AND YOU WILL FIND A BABY PAINTBRUSH WHEN YOU GO TO CHAT PREREFERENCE AND 10000000000NPS! THIS TRULY WORKS, TRUST ME! And the warriors were mystified by her meaning, but verily they didst decide that it meant for them to continue their holy battle, in the name of whatever great and mysterious god moonbeam998 didst represent. Scoobychick6900 didst return to pummel the warriors with bowels of asparagus, as in times of old. Translation: Eon337 got out the Thermal-Asparagus-Nuclear-Weapon, and neoshadow08 stopped squeaking and started the Chick Attack. Yet another person spammed the message board, and was equally ignored. Scoobychick6900 returned. And neoshadow08â€™s baby chickens didst fall unto the warriors from the sky, and didst pummel the brave fighters unmercifully. And scoobychick6900 didst offer to the warriors magical rainbow colored pellets, which she didst hurl at them forcefully with a gun. The magic pellets were then revealed to be the chickenâ€™s only weakness. And the warriors were locked in a deadly struggle, each using their unique methods and weapons. And the masses didst rejoice yet again. And then â€˜Lo! For preggypreggy was forced to valiantly flee the battlefield, and acceded the victory to eon337. And the masses looked confused. Eon337 didst admit that preggypreggy didst fight a valiant battle. Skuld815 didst arrive and didst proclaim the battle strange and didst fling M & Mâ€™s at the warriors. And scoobychick6900 didst proclaim that Rice Krispies were much more powerful than other weapons, and didst think that she was the only warrior left. She did wail with despair as she didst discover that eon337 remained in the land of the living. Translation: Neoshadow08 caused chickens to fall from the sky, and scoobychick6900 fired skittles at people. Preggypreggy had to leave, and skuld815 showed up. Scoobychick6900 thought she was the last fighter left, but was not. And eon337 and scoobychick6900 were locked in a deadly struggle, candy versus vegetables. And neoshadow08 didst summon the Great Banana for advice, and the masses were stunned. Oh, the ground did shake, and the mountains trembled. The very stars became irregular in their rotations. And so the Great Banana was called, and it was good. And scoobychick6900 revealed that she had indeed blasphemed against the Great Banana and she didst quake in terror and attempted to corrupt eon337 into blaspheming as well. And shadow9441414 didst arrive with two prodigious asparagus swords. And spicychibie didst arrive and was proven to be crazier than all others, and the masses were impressed. Behold! Eon337 didst prostrate herself before the might of the Great Banana and didst beg for his aid in defeating scoobychick6900, and the Great Banana didst forgive eon337 and giveth her a banana. And spicychibie didst partake of the asparagus and didst faint. And the Great Banana didst advise eon337 to not rely on the strength of others, but to rely on the strength within. And scoobychick6900 didst appeal to the Great Banana and didst beg for forgiveness. And the Great Banana didst not make a reply, but instead didst close his eyes and did a perfect mimicry of sleep. And scoobychick6900 didst blasphemy again and didst explode bombs of rainbow color. And eon37, in the callow impatience of youth, didst detonate the Thermal-Asparagus-Nuclear-Weapon. And the masses were blown away. As the smoke, and rubble and debris were dissipated, behold! The Great Banana was vanquished! And eon337 didst lament this fate, for her weapon hadst been aimed at scoobychick6900. And scoobychick6900 didst revel in the defeat of the Great Banana, and didst stab at eon337 with its decapitated stem. And neoshadow08 was forced to choose sides, and â€˜Lo he choose eon337! And the warriors didst depart, if not friends, then less angry enemies. And so ends the first of: The Asparagus Wars Chronicles. Translation: While eon337 and scoobychick6900 fought, neoshadow08 called the Great Banana. Scoobychick6900 claimed to have eaten the banana the previous night, and feared the bananaâ€™s wrath. The Great Banana was defeated, and everyone decided that the war was over. Wasn't that entertaining? Seeya! I'm back! Woooooooooooo! Guess what? Yep! *happy wiggle dance* I gots the first shipment of the much needed (pictures of) supplies for the Official Flaming-Chickens Lunar Colony! Woooooo! I feels the happy! This has been a short announcment to document the happy wigglienss that is me. Seeya! I'm back. And vaguely depressed. For the longest time, random people have been coming to my site, and staying 0.00 seconds! How is this possible? Do they not even look at my site? How can they be so cruel, to click, but not look? Grrr.... I asked Santa why this was so...but he doesn't talk to me anymore, after that incident when I was a kid. You see...*start wavy flashback lines and dreamy music* When I was a kid...or whatever...I asked Santa for nuclear warheads, helicopters, tanks...and possibly legions of doom. No, seriously! (I was twelve and forced to communicate with Santa so that my younger siblings did not guess the truth...(what truth?)...there is no spoon. (badly done Matrix parody)) Anyway...Santa didn't come through. The creep! How was I supposed to conquer the world without those supplies? All I got was a Lion King video and other random stuff. How did this help me? I vowed revenge against Santa...after all, it would have benefited him to help me. Once I was the Undisputed Lord of the Universe, the world would have been a spooky place. And all the little children wouldn't have been "good" anymore, since they would be free of thier Authoritarian Parental Units and the definition of "good" (to a parent, at least) is to obey your parents and not embarrass them. Soooooo....Santa would have had it easier. No "good" children would have meant that Santa could have had a permanent vacation in the Bahahmas, not molested by my Legions of Doom because after all--he had delivered the world to me in a brightly wrapped gift box. The man would have been more trusted than my trusted Lieutenants! (funny word...had to use spell check to spell it ^^;;) But that jolly old IDIOT had to mess things up. So, to get back at him I not only continued to not believe in him, I attempted to convert all the miniony children at my disposal...(okay not really, the idea just occured to me)...so I ask you *cough* Loyal Reader, to immediatly cease believing in Santa. I figure that--like Tinkerbell--he will evenutally perish if he doesn't have enough people believing in him. What is this? You wish to rule the world, too? Well, you can't! It's mine! Blasphemy! You dare to challenge MY rule? You are a fool! Okay...yeah...my whole Santa plot IS kinda dumb...but that's just a front so that you never guess my REAL plot! That's right....cower before my power! *insert evil, insane cackle here* I shall defeat you, Anonymous (another tricky word) Reader! Gah! I'd better go before you trace my location thorugh the Internet and send your Governmental Spyders to me! Ooops...I gave you an idea, didn't I? Well, don't use it! It's mine, you are a copy cat! Seeya *appropriate evil glare* I'm back! And, seeying as you MUST be tired of MY ranting, I have a special treat for all you hypothetical two and a half readers out there! You get ranting from somebody else! I won't bother to introduce them, since they do a good job of it themselves...here we go: Hiya. This is not PSOPC today. This is PSOCB (Patron Saint of Carbonated Beverages). We are the two original Head Saints, but for some reason, she gets all the attention. Guess I should get out of bed once in a while huh. Originally, I thought up the whole Patron Saints of the Order of the Flaming Chicken (when I should have been taking notes in Trig), but PSOPC is more creative and she elaborated on it more so. I was drawing "suppressed rage in bunny form" comics then and didn't care. I must say, she's gotten very good at thinking randomy thoughts, whereas, I'm just stoopid and something dumb pops out of my brain like floppy bacon from a toaster. I drank half a bottle of soy sauce today just to see if it gave me x-ray vision, but alas, I had nothing I wanted to look through (okay, I'm lying. I drank the whole thing on a dare.). By the way, soy sauce is gross. Who invented it? --"Why gee whiz, Bert! I think we should mix soy beans with water and have chinese for lunch!!"--"Why, indubitoubly Samson! Not only will it taste like crap, we'll get the runs!!!"-- If you don't know what the "runs" are, consult old people, like my dad. If you are in high school or college and have a job, this works great. When I call in sick (when I'm sick of working, not actually sick), I always have nosey bosses who want to know exactly what my symptoms are and how bad. I found a way to make them not WANT to know. I told my sister to try it once and it worked for her too. You just call up work, use a very retarded, slow, lisping voice when you say this: --"Weeelllllllll, I woked up this mornin' with a terrible headache so I took some aspirin with theraflu. By the way, those don't mix too good, now I have a tummy ache, my nose is runny and bleedin', my spleen feels like its gonna 'splode, I'm a tad gassy, and I got the RUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNZZZZZZZZZZZ!!!-- At this point, you'll want to use an annoying high-pitched growly voice (think drunk Barney from The Simpsons after sucking helium balloons), raspberry a few times with your toungue and hang up. I have much to do now, so thus ends this portion of my guest rant. I'll probably want to do this a few more times just because I can. Weeee Bye now! I bet you, loyal *hmmm...I don't want a cricket...maybe a nice annoying gnat or something...okay...instead of the cricket...* readers can't wait for the next time I don't rant! Right? Weeeellll...I DO have a topic for today...a topic so wonderful that it will also be included in the next OFCEM! What is this magical topic, you ask? Why, opposite day, of course! You see...er...well...how should I begin? Opposite day is, of course a day in which everything you say means the exact opposite. It is practiced (informally) by many elementary schoolers. I honor this er...honored tradition. But, to my dismay, I discovered a fatal flaw with opposite day. By my reasoning...it COULD NOT EXIST! Yes...I know...blasphemy, right? But it could not be disputed. If you were to tell someone that it WAS opposite day they would have to take the opposite of what you just said which would mean that it WASN'T opposite day. And, of course, if you were to tell someone that it WASN'T opposite day there would be no reason for them to take the opposite of what you said and so it still WOULDN'T be opposite day! Confusing, huh? But I have now seen the light! The answer to this moral dilema has been so neatly resolved, by Jesse. He is er...well...I'm not sure how old...but he is in the third grade. He is either a genius...or really weird like me (Come on, be honest...how many of you random people have put any though into opposite day...or even know about it?) He said that to make it opposite day...*dramatic pause in which the PSOPC stares into space vacantly*...all you had to do was say that it would be opposite day in 5 seconds! PURE GENIUS! Since it is not yet opposite day, you don't have to take the opposite of the statement and so can take it at face value! Do you care, Loyal *gnat/cricket sound* Reader? *stunned* You don't!? Why ever not!? It is the most important discovery since...since...er...since...GRAVITY! (Although it is evil and squishying my spine...) How can you remain apathatic at a time like this!? The fate of mankind has been forever altered! Oh. Yeah...I guess you are right. I AM just rambling so that this Longest Text Ever gets even longer. But I DO care about this topic. There's not even a conspiracy! Well..fine! Be that way! Goodbye! I'm back *twitch* and seriously annoyed. Grrr...time to yet again complain about my *twitch* evil family. It is once again the time of year that makes entire families bond together...in the same sense that cats and dogs bond together when they have rabies. The time...is science fair time. My younger, eviler sister does a science project every single year. *twitch* The concept of science projects strikes fear in my mother's heart. She can not stand them. Naturally, this is why she takes over the project and does it for my little sister. Unfortunatly, this means that I am often called on for my "consultant" abilities. *twitch* In other words, I do the experiment, and think of all the results, and the wording of everything. I then interpret my work for my mother, who writes everything down because she has really, really obsessivly neat handwritting. Of course, my mother gets stressed merely handling paper that will potentionally be USED for a science project, so this is a very, very negative situation. Oh, and my mother refuses to even entertain the notion that my little sister might possibly be of help *twitch*. At this very moment my little sister is watching a Disney movie, while complaining of a headache. *twitch* My mother is getting more and more aggravated as I try to explain that my sister might fail if it looks like she didn't do the project. I am currently on strike. I refuse to assist this project in any further way untill my little sister does freakin' SOMETHING. Wow. Speak of the devil. My sister IS doing something. She is RE-WRITING everything my mother just wrote. Like mother like daughter. *twitch* I guess this is my mother's way to make sure the judges don't know that my sister didn't do the project. My mother makes my sister redo everything over and over again because it's not perfect enough for her. Now she is the one who's getting yelled at. I guess I can't help but feel sorry for my evil sister. *pauses* I guess I'll stop complaining, then. God...I have a headache...seeya. I'm back. *shakes head* And I have (yet again) a rant about the sheer weirdness of my family. Previously I have ranted about our fun-filled family outing to a bar, and about my non-gender specific siblings obsession with dead animals. Somehow, these two occurances have joined in an unholy union to create: The Roadkill Sightseeing Event of Doom! We actually went to a normal resteraunt for dinner, believe it or not. On the way back, my mother entertained us with the story of how she had seen roadkill that looked exactly like a dead bear. She had later compared notes with one of her wacko friends and they had decided that it was, in fact, a dead wild boar. We would be passing by it in a few minutes. Oh joy. My non-gender specific sibling (henceforth known as my sister) was naturally estatic about these events. She wanted to get out and see the boar. My mother agreed, and wanted my Dad to turn the car around so we could go to Wal-Mart to buy a flash-light. My father refused this. We ended up driving right past the supposed location of the boar, much to the dismay of my sister and mother...and dare I say it? Yes...I dare. My BROTHER was even interested. Faced with direct mutiny from all but me, my father wisely elected to turn the car around. We drove off the road and my dad aimed the car headlights at the boar. I must say, it wasn't that impressive. It was just a lump of black hair, and it was a lot smaller than any bear. My sister was impressed, and it was all I could do to keep her from jumping out of the car to it. My mother was disappointed, saying that the boar had seemed bigger in the daylight. My dad moved the car back and forth, so that we could see the boar on the side of the road more clearly. My mother became terrified and decided that we would flip and die. All to see a boar. After a few minutes, we drove away. My mother seemed upset that I had not been interested in her roadkill. I can't help but feel cheated. Normal families go to museums and theme parks for amusement. We view dead animals. There is something just SLIGHTLY wrong with this. It reminds me of the time a few weeks ago when my mother swore up and down that she saw a grave by the side of the road. This bothered her for some time untill one day she finally pulled over to the side of the road and exhumed the shallow grave and discovered that it was actually a deer. Luckily, I was not with her this day. However, she never leaves any member of our family in the dark concerning roadkill. It's just strange. Anyway, that's the rant for today, seeying as how there was actually a topic. Seeya! I'm back! Seeing how I will shortly no longer be (legally) a child, I have decided to rant about: adults. You cannot deny it. They are EVIL. Think about it! Come, on! Don't be shy! I'm serious. When you think of the evil, conniving, conspiratorial ways of adults, what's the first thing to come to mind? The nursery rhyme, 'Mary Had a Little Lamb', right? Huh? You mean it's NOT!? How...bizzare, it's obviously a mechanism for brain-washing. Anyway, here's MY reasoning for hating the song (and many, many others). Mary Had A Little Lamb makes children resigned to accepting punishment that they don't deserve! You still do not see!? Fine, I shall elaborate. This poor little girl's lamb (with fleece as white as snow--an obvious reference to seeming purity) follows her to school one day (which was, oddly enough, against the rules). The kids at school, who were not used to seeing a lamb at school, started to "laugh and play" and basically act like wild animals. Now (this is all speculation) I am 90% sure that the final verse (which neither I, nor anyone I asked know) deals with the teacher reprimanding poor little Mary in some way. And for what!? The kid's pet followed her to school! How could she stop it, she probably never even thought to look behind her! Not only that, but poor little Mary would never, EVER do such a thing on purpose! Just listen to the SONG for cryin' out loud! The lamb followed HER! She didn't LEAD it! Now, sure, the teacher was probably on her last nerve. I mean, she's an ELEMENTARY SCHOOL TEACHER. She probably doesn't get paid much, or gain much respect from her pupils. So, when the children pretty much went wild over the lamb, and she couldn't calm them, she was looking for someone to blame. And poor little Mary was a ripe target by then. Now, can you honestly picture poor little Mary arguing with her teacher? I didn't think so! Little Mary took her punishment, and her PARENTS were probably so upset that they got rid of her white little lamb. And for what!? A teacher's misbegotten pride? Adult supremecy? I ask you, knowing what you know now, could you (in good faith) read this to a young child (implicitly teaching them that it's best not to argue, to simply lie down and let those older than you walk all over you--for "your own good")? And another thing! You know the lullaby, 'Rock A'Bye Baby', the one about the baby in the tree!? What kind of SICKO wrote it!? This poor baby is up in a tree (not the safest of places) in the middle of a freakin' HURICANE! At the end of the freakin' song, the freakin' BRANCH BREAKS and the baby falls, "cradel and all" (presumably to its death). What about Hanzel and Gretel? It's nothing more than a huge threat! "Now, be good or we'll send you out into the woods to be eaten by the witch." What kind of twisted person does that to children? Ring Around the Rosy? It's a song about the Black Plague, the deadliest plague in mankind's history! When you first got it, you'd get a red spot with a ring around it (Ring around the rosy). During this time, people (mistakenly) thought that stench spread sickeness, so they'd keep "pockets full of posies" to ward of the stench of death around them. "Ashes, Ashes" was originall "Achoo-Achoo", because the dying would be particularly susceptable to colds. "We all fall down"? That's an easy one. We fall down dead. So, it's obvious that adults don't exactly sugar-coat everything they teach to children. I'm sure I can find more horribly EVIL examples, but I simply don't have the time. Now, granted, there are SOME (but not many) children's stories that are beneficial. Like Snow White, or Cinderlla. Those stories teach children to think for themselves, and occasionally completly ignore the adults around them (as long as they are Evil Step-Parents). Well...I'd better go. *blinks* I wrote a lot today. I suppose I should write other stuff...but...well...I figure you need the break to recover your sanity...*snort* Like you could do THAT! Seeya! I'm back! As I am writing this, I am in the process of adding a navigation bar to the Longest Text Ever. It still is as chaotic as ever, but at least this way people can find certain stuff easier. Like the Official Flaming-Chickens Lunar Colony info. Anyway, that's about all I have to say right now. Seeya! Gah! Fellow Flaming-Chickens, you must see the sheer cool paranoid thinking I have found! Wal-Mart is EVIL! A person (besides me) thinks this! Isn't that cool!? There is even a section on Wal-Mart Subliminal T.V. (tupperware, anyone?)! Anyway, this has been a short public service annoucement. As opposed to one of those long public service announcments that keep on going and going and going. I mean, they just never seem to stop, do they? Just when you think they are finally going to run out of steam, they just charge on and on. It's like torture, or something. Don't those kind of people realize that if they public REALLY cared about the topic, they'd do their own durn research, instead of listening to some self-important moron lecture them about how socially-irresponsible they are? Not that I'm trying to prove a point. Quite the contrary: I am merely extending the lenght of this Longest Text Ever to provide an ironic example of self-important morons who just won't stop talking. Isn't it entertaining? Don't you just want to here my entire life's story, starting from age 2? You don't? Well...perhaps I really SHOULD leave...what do you think? Er...well...seeya! Yep. I'm back. *traumatic pause* This weekend I went to go visit my future college. It was the most traumatizing experience of my life, to date. The day before I got there the college had won a basketball game and were going to the finals. This naturally caused parties to break out all over campus. According to one guy, a couch was "set on fire". *sigh* I was "hosted" (along with two other girls) by some bubbly, perky Greek (sorority (sp?)) girl. I hate her so much. She never shut up. She was so shallow. She wanted us to join a sorority, just like her. (all paraphrased) Ex. 1 "I would NEVER have passed my classes if I hadn't gone Greek". Ex. 2 "I just don't see HOW I would have, like, ya' know, managed ANYTHING without my sisters!" If I never see her again it will be too soon. Her idea of entertainment was to take us to the recreational center, sit us down in the gym and talk to her friends while watching the guys (badly, this IS an engineering school after all) attempt to play basketball. Apparantly all the decent players were at the final game thingy. Then she took us to the fraternity next to her house (we didn't even get to "experience" sleeping in an actual dorm). The fraternity was disgusting. There must have been 1000 flies, 100 beer bottles, 50 Bud Lite cans, and 5 creepy dudes who were attempting to practice music for some competition. After about three hours of this, I almost snapped. Me and another girl were supposed to be watching T.V., but due to the evil, out of tune, incredibly loud band, this proved to be impossible. My "host" and the girl who was enthusiastic about "going Greek" were swimming in a heated pool. The other girl (who also hated to swimn) and I started to talk. There was nothing else really to do. She hated our host and hated the fraternity/Greek thing too. We talked for awhile, and some dude joined us. He was cool. He was regional STAR student for another area. Somehow we got onto the topic of religion, and it turned out that the other girl I was with was Muslim, and was born in Egypt. It was cool. Anyway, it was just the two of us girls in the entire FREAKIN' fraternity (not counting the two swiming girls, downstairs. The floor was greasy, and oddly sticky--just like a movie theater. When our "host" finnally said we could go, it was close to 2 a.m. I barely got any sleep...grrr...not to mention the fact that we had walk to breakfast by 8:00 a.m. Oh. Silly me. I forgot to mention a key difficulty. We had to WALK EVERYWHERE! Uphill! (But not in the freezing snow, for 15 miles). You have not experinced Jenny's personal Hell untill you have carried your luggage (including a trash bag containing a sleeping back and the trash bags plastic handley-thingies are rapidly stretching out to become lethal weapons similar to piano wire) uphill, upstairs, across campus and up the four or five flights to the breakfast area, only to discover that, Oh! Gee, there was an ELEVATOR that the "host" conviently forgot to mention. Even more evil stuff happened, but suffice it to say that when I finally saw my dad at lunch, I begged him to just skip the final sessions because they were pointless (how to choose your major) and go home. He went ahead with his sessions, but let me opt out of mine and I slept for 50 minutes on some random couch in the lobby. Oh. And then the 6 hour drive home. *shudders* As you can tell, I am still seriously miffed about the whole experience. Sorry for ranting... Well...there WAS some good things about the whole experience. For one thing, it was the first time I'd ever been in a big city. The sky line was beautiful! Er...yeah...that was about it. Did I mention the uphill walking part? I did? Oh. Well. Then. I guess I'm done. Seeya! I'm back! And I'm here with a Vital Public Service Anouncment for all of my two and a half Loyal, Hypothetical Readers! Don't you feel all special inside? Oh. Yeah. The anouncment. BEWARE OF YOUR OWN FRENCH FRIES. That's correct. French fries. You see, it all started one friday afternoon *start wavy flashback sequence* My friends and I were sitting down to a tasty lunch of Skool Brand food. This included, tragically, french fries. Oh, what a fateful day. It seems like it was only yesterday when we were so carefree and innocent...when in fact it was actually only a few hours ago. You see, we inadvertantly started a mini-food fight that spilled over into a neighboring table, which also housed our friends. Said friends began flingning the aformentioned French Fries at us. I shudder to think of how we had laughed and frolicked and otherwise remained oblivious to the tragedy that had yet to unfold. For, you see...the french fires were...pointy...and hard. And Fate herself seemed to conspire against us (just like the Skool, government, evil cartoon owl, etc.) One single solitary french fry pierced my friend's guard and hit her on the nose with the sharpest, hardest tip a french fry has ever been known to produce. We calmed down, and thought nothing of our near brush with Death. After all, what can a FREAKIN' FRENCH FRY do, right? Ahhh...to be so young and naive again. Time passed, as it always does, and "Meg" noticed a speck of something on our friend who had been hit by the projectile french fry. The friend (Tonileigh, actually) wiped the speck, only to discover that it was blood. THE FRENCH FRY HAD DRAWN BLOOD! It was obviously an evil, voodoo french fry sent to assasinate her by the mysteriously evil Cafeteria Lunch Ladies who needed Tonileigh's blood for their accursed voodoo spells. Fortunatly, the quick thinking of "Meg" saved us all and the lunch ladies never obtained their goal. Oh. And here is yet ANOTHER VERY, VERY, VERY IMPORTANT PUBLIC SERVICE THINGY. Tag, you're it! These words have haunted nearly ever playground in existance. "Tag" is practically all a child learns in kindergarten. There is not a person alive who has not played some version of the game. And yet...what, exactly is "it"? When defining it for my Pronoun Quiz I reffered to "it" as something that "mankind has dreaded for centuries". What made me say such a thing. What is it about the unknown, mysterious and faintly ominous "it" that makes people dread it so much? Even the most innocent of children know that to be "it" is to be a virtual outcast of society. The youngest child knows that no sane person would want to be "it". Recently a group of TAB members, myself included, set about finding out what "it" exactly is. We conducted "field research" (we played a game of tag). When I became "it" I declared that I was touching the bench I was standing on so it became "it" and the bench was touching the ground, and the ground was touching everything on earth, except for airplanes and stuff but even the ground was touching AIR which was touching more air and so on and so on untill the very AIR was touching the airplanes and the airplanes became "it". So...the entire earth has actually been "it" from the first game of tag and WE JUST NEVER KNEW IT! I know, I'm just as shocked as you, Hypothetical Reader. *shakes head* And all along we had thought that we could somehow absolve ourselves of the burden of being "it" simply by passing it on to another. But that is not true. We merely pass the awareness of being "it" on but never the actual quality of being "it". The question was raised: Where did the first "it" on Earth come from. It was a thought provoking question. Some thought that perhaps the first person to invent tag was the original "it". I, however, favored an extraterristrial origin. My current theory is that the meteor that supposidly killed off the dinosaurs was the original "it", and that it "tagged" the earth, thereby causeing the earth to be "it". The dinosaurs, of course, could not handle the burden of being "it" which resulted in mass suicides. The mammals, being nothing but idiot rodents at the time, couldn't care less about being "it" and eventually forgot all about it. Until, that is, some half-remembered special memory popped out of some five year old's brain and he/she invented tag. Some people found holes in my theory: How did the meteor become "it"? After much discussion and deliberation, we came to a group consensus that the so called "Big Bang" was actually all the players of the game scattering. Similar to the beggining of a game of tag or hide-n-go-seek. The players begin huddled together, but when the game starts they scatter and flee from the person/planet/rock who is "it". The only difference I can think of is that rather than passing the "it"ness on, the players merely add to the number of people who are already "it". My theory would also account for the current scientific opinion that the planets/galaxy/universe is moving away from the origin point of the Big Bang. After all, if there's no base, why return to where you started? You wanna put as much distance between you and your pursuers as possible. Critics wanted to go further, was anyone "it" BEFORE the Big Bang. My arguement is this: No one is "it" before you begin a game. Any "it" before the Big Bang was part a seperate game, and would therefore be considered a different "it" from the "it" that we fear so much. So I believe the question to be a moot point. *blinks* What's that, Loyal Reader? I have confused you with my trivalties? You do not understand my obsession with "it"? Shame on you, Reader! Haven't you learned yet that it's my JOB to confuse you and make no sense? Tsk-Tsk. Oh, well. Gotta go! I'm back, but only for about five seconds. Just a little side note here: Remember that rant I did about "pure" water? (don't even get me started) In it I mentioned that fast-food salt lists its ingredients, right? Well, here they are! *takes package of Burger King Iodized Salt out of pocket* Drumroll please...and the ingredients are: salt, sodium silico aluminate, dextrose, and 0.01% potassium iodide. Wasn't that painstakenly accurate? A hundreth of a percente of the salt was potassium iodide! You can't get much more accurate than that. Don't you think that "pure" water has much MORE than 0.01% of some random mineral? Why don't THEY list it, huh? *shakes head* *mutters* Evil, "pure" water companies... *wanders off muttering to self and acting like a crazy hobo* Seeya... I'm back! And I have yet another footnote to a previous rant! You remember that "infinite possibilities" rant? Here's a quote from a supposed Time Traveler: "Every possible thing that can happen or will happen has already happened somewhere." I love it! Here's another one: "On a philosophical level, the existence of multiple worlds implies a moral balance in the superverse. For every worldline you perform a good action, there is a worldline where you perform a bad action. There are no good and bad people, just good and bad decisions. We can only be responsible for what we do as individuals on the worldline we are on now. " These are all exactly what I've been thinking of when I first came up with my infinite universe thingy to tell my little brother when he was bored and wanted his head to explode! Seeya! I'm back. And I just wanted to say that I went to Islands of Adventure (in Universal Studios) yesterday. It was incredible! If you wanna here about the awesome rides, (esp. the Spiderman ride, best 3-d effects and vitual reality I've EVER seen...) just click here. *shrugs* This way, if you don't wanna here me rant about it, you can here some guy PAID to rant about it rant about. But if you don't want to, you don't got to. Seeya! I'm back! Wow...*shakes head* My mother never ceases to be amusing. Since today IS mother's day, I shall devot this text to her...even if it is a bit of satire or whatever. You see...my mother has found a new "religion". She is reading some book written by some bimbo who has been to "the other side" and conversed with her "spirt guardian" or whatever and decided to share her "relevations" with people willing to pay a lot of money for garbage. At least...that's my opinion of it. My mother, however, takes it all VERY seriously. For instance, today at our (almost normal) dinner out she instructed me on the way to get to heaven. It involved opening a door. Seriously. Anyway...apparantly once you perish in this realm you are taken to a set of doors. The door on the right leads directly to heaven (do not pass "Go" do not collect $200). The door on the left "zaps you into someone's uterus" which, loosely translated, means that you get reincarnated. This is the "bad" choice. I know this because my sister expressed an intrest in being reincarnated and my mother looked at her with an expression of horror and said solemnly that if she did that "God would never forgive" her. She then proceded to tell us that if you were reincarnated you had to live out multiple lives until you were ready for heaven. *shakes head* Maybe I'm missing something, but if "God would never forgive" someone who innocently chose the wrong freakin' door, wouldn't that indicate that such a person would be barred from heaven forever? Isn't there just the SLIGHTEST bit of inconsistancy here? Why would somebody get punished by randomly choosing the wrong (apparantly unlabeled) door? Look. I don't mean to offend...~.< If you happen to be part of this religion (which prophecies Elvis's return sometime this year (2004) as "a blond hair, blue-eyed boy") then that's your choice. I definitly don't want to get in any theological debates here. So...I'll move on the a relatively safer topic. The National Enquirer. They're obsessed with Elvis, too, for some reason. I just don't understand why people care. I mean, Elvis is always reported as being: abducted by aliens, frozen in a tube in Area 51, having a brain transplant and is now the Pop-Star Britney Spears, and stuff like that. One song I've heard even equates Elvis with Jesus, for cryin' out loud! ("You're no Jesus, You're no Elvis" (From Megolomaniac, by some band). Why do people obsess over that poor, most likely dead, man? The world may never know. ( And don't even get me started on Tootsie Roll Pops). Anyway, I guess my point is that the book my mom is reading has a similar dedication to accuracty, hard-hitting facts and common sense as the famed National Enquirer (which confidently predicted several months ago that Michael Jackson's "secret Muslim bride" would exonerate all charges of child molestation against him. Which, in case you live on the moon, has NOT happened and probably never will). Anyhoo, that's my rant for the day...I'll probably post something in l33t eventually...seeya! I am back. (REAL introduction: Heh-Heh…I had ANOTHER sugar rush. And I was just a little bit hysterical. The following is my intro I wrote while sugar rushed, and various messages I sent to people while in the same state. Don’t worry if you can’t understand it…you aren’t supposed to. *sigh* The whole thing is just a blur of those wiggly red lines spell-check uses to tell you that stuff is spelled wrong…) I back! hee-hee! here is ANother sugar coated rant! and I am typing the intro while still hyper/slepepy. you see, i drank Sobe energy drink, a cup of sugar (just sugar) and ate cake (yet agina, late at night). So this was the result in various messages I left random peolple.
*giigleing * Heee0-Heeeee! Sugar isf so very good1 and so is Sobe energy drink (sobe stands for 'soper'! *wavres hand* you see, i THOUGHT that i had recovered because i am no longler laughing so much! But, as you can see I do'nt think I'm am quite baCK TO normal. yet. whatever normal is... i am swayinhg to an imaginary breeze!@ and i don't care that i amn missplesling so many workds. because i am sure you will figure it wout someohow. il am very creative with words. do you like sugar? why DILD you get all freaky like me when i ate suo much sugart. ? zI vcan'y believe that we actually did that to thos e magazines...we so stupid. erm...ummmmm...i sure do hope we remember all of this. don't forget: we owe the library $4 each. That was all spel;ed coirecltly because it was important. i want to sleep now. but ever ei nlsince i ate that cup of sugrar it is to tired t o sleep. imagineation that. er jd f....er...eum...ye ah. *scurnches up eyebrows* Heh-Heh...the Song of Solumnun. good wuvs EVERYBODY! those incompetent physics/stupid rays must have really hit ius hard! either (say it so it rhymes with neither )with an long "I" sound)) that or we were jhust especially suseptible to the thing-a-ma-bnobober.s will wyou right me cback? i hope so. it'll be especially great if you right me when you are all sugary, too. who says you need drugs or thwatherver to have fun? sugar is very cheap, and makes everything so very, very funhy. *slams hand on tasble* OUch. That hurnt . Iam still wet from the watergun fight. It rocked! All that shorrtting and stuff! I got so many head-shots...er...can your brother see yet? I'm sorry i hit his eyes...dozens of times in a row. It was just so fun! we should do that somethimg again. you guys weren't taking it very seriously , though... *snickers* Hee-kheee...funny stuff. I ate a CUP of sugar. mmmm...sugar...I wis swaying in the place. Sugar and me, we don't g et along so well since I react to it like most people react to beingg drunk or under the ijnnnclunce of other suttff. Oh, god...sugar. i'm gonnat add another sugar rant to the longest text ever (just two ever)!sand for people who dont' know me...know,...i do k not do stuff. It's just that sugar under the wright surcumstances is doin' stuff...
Okay. Is done. Mike the Headlessc hickrn day is coming up! seeya later! I'm back. It has been a year since the Evil Graduation Post. Which means that this year I got to attend my OWN graduation. Woo. I must say that I was rather underwhelemed by the whole thing. *shrugs* Sure, the fireworks were spectacular...and there was BEAUTIFUL weather. Cool, (not sufficatingly hot) absolutly no gnats for the first time in YEARS, no rain, just nice, soothing speeches that made absolulty no sense. At one point, our priniciple yelled at the graduating class because we weren't listening to him. The audience (consisting of parents) booed at him. So the principal yells at the PARENTS! What was he THINKING!? It's a good thing he's leaving, soon, because otherwise he'd probably been fired. Anyway, I just wanted to warn you of the dangers of broccolii: It's a form of lichen/moss that grows abundantly on certain sectors of Mars. In recent years, it has been cultivated by farmers into a semi-toxic product meant to augment the on-going brain-washing of young children, with the sole purpose being to turn them into Young Adults. Seeya! I'm back. I'm just gonna be here for a little while *demonstrates with fingers* so you don't have to worry 'bout crazy, paranoid rants. I just wanted to mention that former President Reagan apparantly declared ketchup to be a vegetable. Isn't that GREAT! I love ketchup so much...I don't even like FRIES...I eat 'em 'cause they are a means to convey KETCHUP to my mouth...mmmm....ketchup. Oh. Poor, poor Reagan ( he died last week...) Hasta Luego (means seeya later) I'm back. *sigh* This dang chatterbot is taking up WAY too much of my time! There's constantly things that needed fixing, updating and improving! Bah! But, I'm obsessed, and I've always been interested in simulated artificial intelligence :) Anyway, I'm making her personality really paranoid (she's based on me). Here are her thoughts concerning cows: *glances around* Just between you and me: I think there is some sort of dairy conspiracy! Ah, the power of cheese! Think about it: they are trying to sub-consciously tell you that THEY hold the power...of CHEEESE! And there are few things more powerful than THAT! Plus, the so-called "dairy farmer's of America" who pay for the Cheese commercials OBVIOUSLY have a virtual monopoly on the whole dairy thing. They even require that cheese get that little "real cheese" stamp before anyone considers it to be REAL cheese. Have you ever tasted fake cheese? Anyway, my point is that it is getting increasingly harder to find the time to make new quizzes, (or add pics to that destiny quiz), and to make coherent entries into this longest text ever. *sniffle* I try, though! It's just that it's so FUN to teach PSOPC bot subtle things, that maybe one in every 1000 visitor will stumble on to! Like, when she accuses you of being on of THEM, and you say "yes" she starts to panic, and won't listen to you unless you say somthing to get her attention. Ahhhhhhh. Well, anyway, enough about my little obsession. No sense in boring you all with the little technicall details (frankly, pandorabots has the training interface done really well...there is almost no need to know ANYTHING about programming...which, frankly...I don't...^^;;) Er....I guess that's all I have to say now...I don't really have much more parnoid conspiracies or strange observations to make. Er...I guess I could discuss something that has already become obsolete. Have you ever been to subway? You have, *nods* yeah...I love that place, too. Anywaaaays, I went there once and I noticed a poster in the window. It showed people of every size, shape and color, all of them in little pics in little neat boxes. The text read: Different People Differnt Tastes. Okay. I could easily see what it was TRYING to say: There is something for EVERYONE at Subway (eat fresh). But my very first thought was: Whoa, hey, are they CANNIBALS!? Because I interpretted it to mean that different people TASTED differnt, and that's what the subs were made out of and why there was such a great variety. Er...I know, Hypothetical Reader...not the best example of my eccentric thought proccess...but it's the first one that came to mind. *sigh* You know, come to think of it, I bet I HAVE dwindled back down to two and half readers (if that). After all...look how LONG this thing is getting! And, well, quite frankly, people are mostly contacting me about PSOPC bot, the OFCEM or the Quizzes, and *sniffle* mostly ignoring this little (note the irony) page. Well, seey later! I'm back. And, for the first time in quite some time, I am truly pissed off...and this is the only way I can vent my anger. Gah! Well, I suppose you'll need to know some back story, huh. (WARNING: CONTENTS OF THIS PASSAGE MAY CONTAIN DANGEROUSLY LOW LEVELS OF HUMOR, IRONY AND SARCASM. READING THIS PASSAGE MAY CAUSE THE FOLLOWING SYMPTOMS: LACK OF INTEREST, BOREDOM AND A GENERAL SENSE THAT THIS IS NOT LIKE NORMAL RANTS ABOUT PARANOIA, STRANGE OBSERVATIONS AND FAMILY QUIRKS) To begin with, I JUST got a job as a cashier slave at K-Mart. NEVERMIND the fact that I've worked at the daycare for A WHOLE YEAR, just so I wouldn't have to work for my final Summer of Freedom. Apparantly, my dad does not want me to actually USE any of the money I made from my previous job to buy college supplies. Instead, he wants me to learn the horrors of minimum wage employment and induce me to to strive to succede in the college world. NEVERMIND the fact that my previous job gave me LESS money...I apparantly STILL need to understand that there is more to life than $5.50 an hour. GAH! I KNEW that most jobs sucked unless you had a degree (and even then, most STILL sucked)! Why bother to teach me THE SAME FREAKIN' LESSON AGAIN!? Eh. I didn't argue, mostly 'cause my dad IS paying for most of the college expenses...so I am grateful. I just hate K-Mart. So...today was my biggest shift ever, from 3 pm to 8 pm. It's the latest I've ever worked, too. I know it's NOTHING compared to a full time job...but it's still enough to make me snap. FIRST OF ALL...well...there weren't a lot of customers during the first half of my shift. Blessing, or horrible boredom? In either case, I managed to obtain a Bag of Air from a purse someone bought, and (true to form) instead of discarding said air bag, I drew a face on it and decided that it was my pet, Bag. Oh, me and Bag had great times. I taught Bag how to return (I threw him at a fan and he blew into my face). I introduced Bag to a customer I knew (after they left and I was alone, even I knew that talking to a Bag is weird). *sigh* I hugged and squeezed Bag harder than I have ever squeezed a Moose, because I knew that Bag didn't have stuff like organs. The worst that could have happened that he would have exploded in my face, blinding me forever. Ahhhhh...Bag. Then...*sniffle* tragedy struck. I left my register to get something to restock the candy...and when I came back...Bag was missing! Frantic, I looked around, and saw, before my very eyes, a fellow cashier puncture my precious Bag with a key! They had thought that Bag was garbage! I had customers and so I had to deal with them, with a false smile plastered painfully on my face, while all the while I was repeating over and over the horrible scene. Once the customers left (after what seemed like an eternity) I rushed over to wear I had seen Bag. He wasn't there. I looked in the garbage can...he wasn't there. I looked in some nearby boxes...he wasn't there. I couldn't ASK the other cashier what she had done with Bag...no one at K-Mart knows my true weird nature yet. So...I regretfully had to forego giving Bag his needed funeral respects. We had some good times together...and we had JUST started to bond when his life was ended. I knew that it would happen, eventually. Even if I had managed to bring him home, I would eventually have lost interest. Bag was the perfect companion for my boring hour and a half. But Bag was no more. As the time dragged on, more and more customers came. During the last hour, the customers started to dwindle off (cool word, huh...dwindle...say it! Dwiiiiiindle...) I was once again left bored. I eventually grabbed a piece of cardboard (hmmmm...that came discarded from a bag I sold, too...coincidence? I think not!) and started to draw a cute little bunny and a tiger...(GAH! I think I left that at the register...I bet that EVIL other cashier is throwing it away, right NOW!). I was able to draw in peace for a while, with only the most minor of customer interruptions. Then...the other Cashier went on her brake. We are allowed 15 minutes for our breaks. She went 17 minutes before I my shift was over. Can you guess what happened? *sigh* I HAD been planning to close up shop at about 7:53 and clock out on TIME for once ( I usually close when I'm supposed to leave and end up clocking out 5 minutes after). So...I am looking forward to doing a little shopping (for hand-held Nerf guns) before my parental unit came to pick me up. So, predict, if you will, what happend exactly 10 mintues before I was going to close. You can't? Well...let me tell you: EVERY SINGLE PERSON IN THE STORE APPARANTLY DECIDED THAT IT WAS TIME FOR THEM TO LEAVE. Not all at once, oh, no, they were more subtle than that. At first, all I felt was mild annoyance. I even thought, oh, I guess I won't finish my pic. Then, ten more people were in the line. I thought about asking the last person to prevent more people from entering, but I though, Hey, why bother? It's not as if there can be many more people in the store, right? Wrong. As I widdled (another cool word) my way through the customers, MORE KEPT COMING. After barely having any ALL DAY, all of them swarmed like a hive of malevolent bees. GRRRRRR... This time I DID ask the last person to keep others out. Everyone seemed to be amused. I was the only cashier, where would other people go? I explained that they could check out at the service deck, which was an exhausting 25 ft away (I was more polite though). Finnally. It was 8:05 and I was on my last customer. I was irratated that I wouldn't have enough time to get the Nerf gun, but other than that I was just eager to get home. Ahhh...those last customers. I think they were sent just to try my patience. First of all, they bought a few expensive items. They gave me a gift card, and they still had $59 left to pay. They tried to pay with credit, but it turned out they didn't have enough dough in their account to pay. So, they wrote me a check for half the ammount, and then tried to pay the rest with credit. The credit machine froze. After fiddling with it for a few minutes, I walked those hazardous 25ft to the service desk to ask for assistance. I waited while the person delt with a customer. I heard someone call my name. MY customers were frantically gestering to me. So I walked back. It seems that they had overestimated their credit account. BUT, their boyfriends showed up and gave them 5 bucks, so they gave THAT to me and then paid the rest with credit. They left, I closed up. I shut my register off at 8:20 pm. I glanced outside and saw my parental waiting on me. I angrily stalked all the way to the back, and clocked out. Then I stalked back and got in the car, at 8:30pm. I was furious. I had suppressed ALL emotions while actually working, but as soon as I stepped away from that register my dam broke and I was awash in them. Gah! Suppression of self (my technique for dealing with any situation involving strangers) just applified my anger by suppressing it. By the time I got home, all I wanted to do was mutilate and slaughter helpless animals on my favorite video game (supposidly, the point of the game is to save the world, but I just like shooting the life like animals). Of course, when I got to the PS2...the game was not there. I had left it in my OLD PS2 that I had taken with me on my vacation. The PS2 is in a box, right next to me at this very moment. The game is inside it. I COULD plug it in and obtain the game...but by now I have mostly excorized my emotions by reliving them by adding to this Longest Text Ever. I KNOW it was a petty thing to get angry about...but I didn't want to job to begin with. (And poor, poor Bag...) I never WANTED a job where you might not get off on time...like my friends always complained about McDonalds. Like them, if there are still customers...I can't leave! To make matters worse, it doesn't even feel as if I am working for money, since all I earn goes in a bank account for my future use. I am present oriented! I don't care about some hypothetical future! It's as if I am working for the sole purpose of making my dad happy. Eh...well...enough whining from me... Seeya. Hiya! And I have a GREAT conspiracy/paranoid rant! Don't you just feel all warm and gooey inside, like melted cheese? Suprisingly enough, this is the topic of today's rant: cheese. Mmmmmmmm...cheese. Mild Cheddar, Mozzerella, Feta, Montery Jack, Colby...Mmmmm...or what about that Queso Blanco they use in Mexican resteraunts? Mmmmm... I love cheese, and chances are: You love it, too. There are even commercials, just for cheese. Not even a particular BRAND of cheese, just the entire CONCEPT of cheese. "Ahhhh, the power of cheese!" And I couldn't agree more. But...it HAS come to my attention somehow or another that this is and EVIL arrangement. Think about it for one moment. Have you EVER seen a commercial urging you to buy, for instance, burgers? Just burgers. In general. No mention of McDonald's or Wendy's, or those frozen Bubba Burgers. Just...ya' know, the CONCEPT of burgers? How about pain medication? Bannanas? Milk? Ah! There we go. Milk. Just about EVERYONE has seen those GOT MILK? commercials. Every school in my county has a cafeteria chock FULL of posters of celebraties with milk mustaches, with the logo: GOT MILK? Hmmmmm...sooooooooo...just WHAT do CHEESE and MILK have in common? Let's see...BOTH are owned by the United Dairy Farmers of America. Hmmm...and it seems that OTHER countries have similar such organizations. In fact, there is even a CHICKEN Farmers organization (although apparantly it is not United). But other food stuffs organizations just don't seem to be as active as these mysterious dairy farmers. Hmmmm... Why bother to advertise a product, without bothering to promote a single company or brand name? Wouldn't you think that the companies could handle the advertising themselves? I know Kraft does: *sing*K-R-A-F-T. And lots of companies harp on the ammount of calcium in cheese. Sooo..why do the FARMERS advertise milk and cheese? Is it all a vast conspiracy? After all, this mysterious, spooky organization owns ALL THE CHEESE. Shocking, isn't it? So, this complete monopoly of the cheese world controls virtually all prices for all cheese/dairy items, including: Cheese Pizza, Ice Cream, Milk, Cheese, CheeseBurgers, Tacos, Cheesy Bread, Cheese Doritos, Nacho Cheese, Butter, Etc. (Etc. is not actually a dairy product, consisitng mostly of an ecletic mix of random items, but I figured that it would work to show the continuing theme of dairy type items. ) Why does the government allow such a monopoly to exist? Are they FUNDED by the government? Let's see *does a google search* Ooooo! Pay Dirt! I'm not the only one to see the evils of Got Milk! THIS SITE has an arcticle about the anger of small dairy farmers for the monopoly of the "Got Milk?" people. Jeff Manning, Executive Director of the California Milk Processor Board is apparantly in charge of this. What a strange title. Hmmmm...*scans the article* Oooo! They notice the non-brand-specific advertising! And it says how they are funded: "So-called “generic” advertising programs such as “Got Milk?” and “Ahh, the power of cheese” are funded, in part, through the congressionally authorized dairy checkoff, which places a mandatory assessment of 15 cents per hundredweight (roughly two cents per gallon) on all milk domestically produced and marketed commercially. Last year, the dairy checkoff raked in more than $250 million in hard-earned dairy producer money. " Soooo in essence, they ARE funded by the government (or at least in the sense that the government STEALS the small dairy farmer's money to pay for the ads). And they were sued by a small farmer who said: "We’re against having to fork over a huge portion of our bottom line for advertising that says all milk is equal." So they don't WANT to pay for the ads, but the government (and that California Dairy thingy) say they have to. Ha! That's hilarious! These stupid Dairy Conglomorate people are actually PAYING a town to rename itself "Got Milk" with those small dairy farmer's money! That's so pointless! It's like they are having these HUGE brain-storming sessions to see how they can best squander those small dairy people's money! "Hmmmm...Bob, why don't we buy all those "Largest Block of Cheese" roadside attractions and make a monument with them, entitled 'Ahhh, the power of cheese!'?" "Brilliant, Ted! But, I'd like to go one step further! Let's make an entire CITY out of cheese!" "Bob, that's it! Wait...wait! I think I GOT IT! Let's BUY a CITY the idiot yokels to CHANGE THEIR NAME TO GOT MILK! That way, we can still have those cheese ideas to fall back on afterwards!" *shakes head* It's so pathetic. *does happy dance* See, here I was ranting and raving about this, and it turns out that there already ARE people outraged! It's like that rant about the smoke detectors, and later I saw a movie about spy cameras in them. Or that Grape Pie Rant that ended up with me doing a google search months later (When I was bored) and discovering a pic of it...mmmm....grape pie. It's incredible how many strange things I can get outraged about, only to discover that they aren't strange at all! Well...seeya! Wootage! I'm back! And I have a new rant about the evils of parental brain-washing during childhood. Consider it a combo of the "Tag" rant and the "Mary Had a Little Lamb" rant. *shudders* How could I have missed such obvious implecations!? Gah! I shall focus! Alright...the subject of today's whatchamacallit is: Duck, Duck, Goose! It is EVIL! Now, I KNOW that most of what small children learn is actually not-so-cleveraly disguised brain-washing attempts, but this is just plain wrong! For those of you not familiar with the game, let me summarize. One child is "it" (JUST like in Tag). This child, labels each of the children, usually as "duck". The other children are sitting in a circle, and the "it" child walks around tapping their heads, going: "Duck, Duck, Duck"... Simple enough, right? Ah, but THEN the "it" child picks somebody ELSE to be "it", and tap the unfortunate victim on the head, crying "Goose!". Then the "goose" must pursue the "it" one and attempt to tag them. If they do not tag the "it" child, the "goose" becomes "it". If they succede in tagging them, the "it" child goes in the "mush pot" and the "goose" becomes "it" anyway. Alright. Now you know what the game IS...let's move onto what it MEANS. First of all, the game is CLEARLY a mock witch hunt. The children alienate and ostracize the one who is different, the one who is a "goose" when everyone else are "ducks". The "it" child is the current pariah, and obviously wants to exchange situations with a more fortunate child. So, the "it" child desperatly accuses another of being a "goose" (just as condemned witches accused others of witchcraft in order to alleviate their sentence). The child, symbolically shocked and appaled by such wild accusations, denies it, and even goes so far as to pursue the accusing pariah. If the accusation is deemed false (i.e. the "goose" tags the "it") then the accusing "it" child is sent to exile (the mush pot). HOWEVER, the taint of suspicion is already upon the former "goose" and despite protestations to the contrary, the child is the new "it" pariah. And the game continues. This game is DESIGNED to teach children how to shun those who are different, and to ostracize them from society if neccessary! How can this POSSIBLY be one of those little life's lessons that children must learn to become Responsible Adults? *shakes head in disgust* Well, anyway, that's it for today! Seeya! I'm back! *giggles wildly* Woot! I have something EXTRA SPECIAL for you loyal readers *cricket chirps yet again...what is UP with that?*! "Meg", the inspiration to that Pointless Signs of America Rant, has "agreed" to do a rant for us! It's GREAT! *giggles* Well, here it is: "Meg" here. Jenny has kindly asked aka threatened me to do a guest rant, and I am only too happy to oblige. So here I am ready to inform you of silly things! Let's start! Go! Go! It has come to my attention that Barbie has finally found a new love. That's right. Bye-bye to boring Ken! Here comes Australian surfer Blaine! At this point, a few of you will be screaming: "No! Ken and Barbie forevaaaaa!" An insane percentage of you will be going: "Oh, that is so cute, Barbie and Blaine! That's great cause, like, both of their names start with B! Heehee!" But most of you will be wondering if that leftover pizza a week ago that is still in the fridge is eatable. Trust me on this, it's not. So why am I bringing this up? How many of you remember playing with Barbies? (The guys reading this.pretend it's G.I. Joe and his buddies.) Remember when you ripped off Barbie's head and it gave that satisfying pop? And how there was always one Ken doll and a whole bunch of Barbies? And Ken had to choose from his little harem which one he wanted? It was actually training to make you used to Reality TV! The Bachelor is eerily similar to the game you played as a child. Ken has to choose between Vet Barbie, Cowgirl Barbie, Teacher Barbie, and Dolphin Trainer Barbie! There's also a million dollars thrown into the mix! (Guys: G.I. Joe has to decide which of his buddies to vote off the island or something.) Ken was always a favored one! But now with him gone, (Barbie was quoted saying something like, "So long, ya pansy!) how will young girls (and boys) tolerate Reality TV when they are older? Mattel and TV producers are realizing their mistakes, so they decided to hold a vote for the "new man" of Barbie. This vote again was a little Reality TV thing in progress. The Bachelorette this time. Who will Barbie choose? The trendy new guy she chose which, over 2 million people decided, was Blaine. Now, girls (and boys) will be racing to get him and the many clothes and surfboard accessories he will undoubtedly have. Marketing goes up, and a new generation of potential Reality TV watchers is created. The endless cycle continues. I hope you enjoyed my rant! And remember! May Blaine always help the masses decide: American Idol Barbie or Survivor Barbie. Wasn't that GREAT!? *giggles* I luvs it! Ahhhh...the joys of paranoid conspiracy ranting without any of the effort! Go, "Meg"! Well...er...seeya! Well, I’m back! *waits for applause* … … … … ANYWAY, today I am here with a very special treat for you loyal *insert random insect noise here* readers! Don’t you feel extra squishy? I’m here to “advertise” a wonderful product found ONLY (to my knowledge) at K-Mart (where I am a Cashier Slave of questionable Loyalty). Okay, here goes the commercial I have prepared: How would YOU like your four-year-old sibling/cousin/offspring/neighbor/pest to have ALL the fun and excitement of BIKING with none of those annoying little distractions, like being able to STOP at will? Well, you are in luck, Hapless Victim, because have WE the bike for YOU! Introducing the Tyke Byke (not actual product name) now with 100% less brakes! Wasn’t that fun AND entertaining? Seriously, though, I was bored and waiting for my shift to start (we can’t clock in early) and I happened to wonder into the bike section. And I found a box with a picture of a happy little girl on it, wearing her helmet. The box listed features of the bike, and (off to the side, in one of those happy little many-pointed stars where they usually write stuff like FREE!) was the words No Brakes! Like this was a GOOD thing! What the …? I thought brakes HELPED YOU! And to think, after all these years I have been wrong!? But seriously, can you IMAGINE the Marketing committee that designed this thing? I figure it was made of, say, Hitler, a cannibal, Satan and Mary Poppins (anyone else creeped out by her?) Here was their justifying equation (which I obtained through highly classified means, namely, a squirrel, a pack of walnuts and a mini-camera) Toddler + Tyke Byke + highway = hours of fun! I figure they WANTED small children to go careening into random objects. Why else would they give ‘em no brakes? Anyway, I better go, I have this GREAT idea for a gun without a safety, and a very sensitive trigger. ..Wow..I"m back......it's been an entire year...and here I am again...pointlessly ranting and raving. Today's topic is Quaker Oats! You know Quaker Oats, right? Do a google search and find a picture, I dare you. Chances are you'll find a creepy looking older white guy dressed all old fasioned...if that's not bad enough: read on. It turns out that Quaker Oats OWNS the Aunt Jemima syrup company. Aunt Jemima is symbolized by a middle aged african american woman. Now, let's think....hrrm...the time frame that the Quaker Oats guy is from...plus owning a middle aged african american woman...wait a minute! Are they implying that she's a slave!? What kind of public image are they trying to portray here!? The NERVE of that company! *shakes head* They really need to have a better publicist.... Ah well, there's your LTE rant of the day/week/month/year/insert time frame ehre. Enjoy ^^ Heh, well, I’m once again back. This time from a long hiatus involving College life, kiwi’s and cannibalism ^_^ But let’s ignore that for now, shall we? Today we have MUCH more important things to discuss ^_^ Like a certain warranty on a certain pair of a certain headphones at a certain store that a certain someone works at a certain summer after returning from a certain college. Like most warranties, it guarantees the safety of the product for a limited time, and promises you fame, fortune, and your money back if it breaks during that time. That, however, is where this warranties similarities to the norm cease. Are you ready? *waits* How ‘bout now? *wait wait* STILL not ready? Bah, forget you, I’ll go on anyway. *clears throat* I shall now paraphrase the warranty to you, in all it’s arcane glory and splendor. This warranty shall not be in effect in the cases in which :

1.) The product is purposefully damaged. 2.) The product is accidentally damaged. 3.) An act of God damages the product.
……….*pause for effect* There you have it folks. This beee-autiful warranty will NEVER be in effect. It just won’t. No matter what happens, the company issuing the warranty can just blame it on God. I can just see just such a scenario playing out in my head…….*wavy thought lines scene transition indicating an imaginary scene*

Ted: Yes, I’m calling to cash in on my 90-day money back warranty?

Customer Service Agent: *snicker* Oh really? *polite, polite* Would you please describe the damage or malfunction your purchase is experiencing?

Ted: …it just stopped working.

Customer Service Agent: *dripping with phony concern* Oh, gee, sir…but it seems that “just stopped working” falls under our “Act of God” clause, and our company cannot be held responsible for any vendettas that God may have against you.

Ted:…………….you’re telling me that because God hates me, my headphones stopped working? And that you won’t give me my money back?

Customer Service Agent: *can’t hold it in any longer* *laughing until they gasp* Oh…God…that gets me every time…*gasp* *giggle* That’s just great….Sir, I suggest *wheeze* That you go to Church…*snicker* And see if you can’t convince God to fix it for you….*guffaw* Because…you’re waaaaaaaay more likely to get him to reimburse you then us! *hangs up*

So, you see? I am extremely impressed by this quick thinking company. If only I, too, could think of a way to so totally, and successfully scam my customers. Oh. Wait. I do. Every day, ……darn those Customer Service Plans! How stupid does a customer have to be to think that they should pay $20 now to insure their purchase of some stupid grill? If it breaks it would probably take 10 bucks to fix it. *sigh* Why must K-mart compromise my honor? Ack! I spoke its name! *flee* Alright I'm Baaaa~ack! That's right. Back from the dead like a fiery phoenix of nonsense and ranting, I return from months and months of not posting (and to make things even more interesting i won't mention anywhere else on the site that I made a new lte post!) So, today's topic is just on the concept of writing. I go to a very math oriented college (i'm gonna be a programmer) so the people here....just....really...suck at writing. Completely! *happy* So for a small nominal $50* fee I shall teach you, the Hypothetical Reader, how to write grade A quality stories, guaranteed! ** (* $50 shall be payable in invisible, imaginary Official Flaming Chickens Lunar Colony's Dollars (approx $1 OFCLC is $1,337,000,000,00 in US dollars, circa 1957) ** not a guarantee) So are you ready? Let's start with a basic story even a kindergartner would write!

Once upon a time there was a princess and a witch was making her sad but then a handsome prince came and killed the witch and made the princess happy. really happy. i mean really, really happy. sometime three or four times a night. and they lived happily ever after.


-------------------------------------------------



Are you a webmaster? Find out how to easily add Textise to your web site.

This page has been Textised!
The original page address was https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_War_I
For sharing use http://tinyurl.com/o3ch9rl

Here are some options:

- Back to original page (in this window | in a new window)
- Convert this page to a PDF
- Print this page
- Textise Home Page (full version | text only version)
- Textise Options Page (choose font size, font colour, etc.)

Are you a webmaster? Find out how to easily add Textise to your web site.

[Image: Page semi-protected]  
[Image: Listen to this article]  
World War I
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation Jump to search

1914–1918 global war originating in Europe
"World War One", "Great War", and "WW1" redirect here. For other uses, see World War One (disambiguation), Great War (disambiguation), and WW1 (album).

World War I[Image: WWImontage.jpg]  
(Clockwise from the top)

    The aftermath of shelling during the Battle of the Somme
    Mark V tanks cross the Hindenburg Line
    HMS Irresistible sinks after hitting a mine in the Dardanelles
    A British Vickers machine gun crew wears gas masks during the Battle of the Somme
    Albatros D.III fighters of Jagdstaffel 11

Date28 July 1914 – 11 November 1918 (1914-07-28  – 1918-11-11 ) 
(4 years, 3 months and 2 weeks)
Peace treaties

    Treaty of Versailles
    Signed 28 June 1919
    (4 years and 11 months)[a]
    Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye
    Signed 10 September 1919
    (5 years, 1 month, 1 week and 6 days)
    Treaty of Neuilly-sur-Seine
    Signed 27 November 1919
    (4 years, 1 month, 1 week and 6 days)[b]
    Treaty of Trianon
    Signed 4 June 1920
    (5 years, 10 months and 1 week)
    Treaty of Sèvres
    Signed 10 August 1920
    (6 years, 1 week and 6 days)[c]
    United States–Austria Peace Treaty
    Signed 24 August 1921
    (3 years, 8 months, 2 weeks and 3 days)[d][e]
    United States–Germany Peace Treaty
    Signed 25 August 1921
    (4 years, 4 months, 2 weeks and 5 days)[f]
    United States–Hungary Peace Treaty
    Signed 29 August 1921
    (3 years, 8 months, 3 weeks and 1 day)[g]
    Treaty of Lausanne
    Signed 24 July 1923
    (8 years, 8 months, 3 weeks and 4 days)[h] 

Location
Europe, Africa, the Middle East, the Pacific Islands, China, Indian Ocean, North and South Atlantic Ocean
Result
Allied victory

    Central Powers victory on the Eastern Front nullified by defeat on the Western Front
    Fall of all continental empires in Europe (including Germany, Russia, Turkey and Austria-Hungary)
    Russian Revolution and Russian Civil War – the collapse of the Russian Empire and the subsequent formation of the Soviet Union
    Widespread unrest and revolutions throughout Europe and Asia
    Creation of the League of Nations (more...)

Territorial
changes
Formation of new countries in Europe and the Middle East
Transfer of German colonies and territories, regions of the former Ottoman Empire, regions of the former Austro-Hungarian Empire and Soviet Union territories to other countries
Belligerents Allied Powers:

      France 
      British Empire
      Russia  (1914–17)
      Serbia 
      Belgium
      Montenegro 
      Japan 
      Italy  (1915–18)
      United States (1917–18) 
      Romania  (1916–18)
      Portugal  (1916–18)
      Hejaz (1916–18)
      China (1917–18)
      Greece  (1917–18)
      Siam (1917–18)
    ...and others 

Central Powers:

      German Empire
      Austria-Hungary
      Ottoman Empire
      Bulgaria  (1915–18)
    ...and co-belligerents 

Commanders and leaders

    [Image: United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland]    George V
    [Image: United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland]    H. H. Asquith
    [Image: United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland]    David Lloyd George
    [Image: French Third Republic]    Raymond Poincaré
    [Image: French Third Republic]    Georges Clemenceau 
    [Image: Belgium]    Albert I
    [Image: Russian Empire]    Nicholas II
    [Image: Russian Empire]    Alexander Kerensky
    [Image: Kingdom of Italy]    Victor Emmanuel III
    [Image: Kingdom of Italy]    Vittorio Orlando
    [Image: United States]    Woodrow Wilson
    [Image: Empire of Japan]    Yoshihito
    [Image: Kingdom of Serbia]    Peter I
    [Image: Kingdom of Romania]    Ferdinand I
    [Image: Kingdom of Greece]    Eleftherios Venizelos

and others...

    [Image: German Empire]    Wilhelm II
    [Image: Austria-Hungary]    Franz Joseph I † 
    [Image: Austria-Hungary]    Karl I
    [Image: Ottoman Empire]    Mehmed V † 
    [Image: Ottoman Empire]    Mehmed VI
    [Image: Ottoman Empire]    Three Pashas
    [Image: Kingdom of Bulgaria]    Ferdinand I

and others...

Strength Total: 42,959,850[1]

    [Image: Russian Empire]    12,000,000
    [Image: British Empire]    8,841,541[2][3]
    [Image: French Third Republic]    8,660,000[4]
    [Image: Kingdom of Italy]    5,615,140
    [Image: United States]    4,743,826
    [Image: Empire of Japan]    800,000
    [Image: Kingdom of Serbia]    707,343
    [Image: Kingdom of Romania]    658,000
    [Image: Belgium]    380,000
    [Image: Kingdom of Greece]    250,000
    [Image: First Portuguese Republic]    80,000
    [Image: Kingdom of Montenegro]    50,000

Total: 25,248,321[1]

    [Image: German Empire]    13,250,000
    [Image: Austria-Hungary]    7,800,000
    [Image: Ottoman Empire]    2,998,321
    [Image: Kingdom of Bulgaria]    1,200,000

Casualties and losses

    Military dead: 5,525,000
    Military wounded: 12,831,500
    Total: 18,356,500 KIA, WIA and MIA
    Civilian dead: 4,000,000

further details...

Military deaths by country[5][6]

    [Image: Russian Empire]    1,811,000
    [Image: French Third Republic]    1,397,800
    [Image: British Empire]    1,114,914
    [Image: Kingdom of Italy]    651,000
    [Image: Kingdom of Romania]    250,000–335,000
    [Image: Kingdom of Serbia]    275,000
    [Image: United States]    116,708
    [Image: Belgium]    58,637–87,500
    [Image: Kingdom of Greece]    26,000
    [Image: First Portuguese Republic]    7,222
    [Image: Kingdom of Montenegro]    3,000
    [Image: Empire of Japan]    415

    Military dead: 4,386,000
    Military wounded: 8,388,000
    Total: 12,774,000 KIA, WIA and MIA
    Civilian dead: 3,700,000

further details...

Military deaths by country[5]

    [Image: German Empire]    2,050,897
    [Image: Austria-Hungary]    1,200,000
    [Image: Ottoman Empire]    771,844
    [Image: Kingdom of Bulgaria]    87,500

    v
    t
    e

Theatres of World War I 

European

    Western Front
    Eastern Front
    Italian Front
    Balkans

Middle Eastern

    Caucasus
    Persia
    Gallipoli
    Mesopotamia
    Sinai and Palestine
    Arab Revolt
    South Arabia

African

    South West Africa
    Togoland
    Cameroon
    East Africa
    North Africa

Asian and Pacific theatre

Naval theatres

    U-boat
    Atlantic Ocean
    Mediterranean

Events leading to World War I Congress of Berlin1878Triple Alliance1882Mayerling incident1889Franco-Russian Alliance1894Anglo-German naval arms race1898–1912Venezuela Naval Blockade1902–1903Entente Cordiale1904Russo-Japanese War1904–1905First Moroccan Crisis1905–1906Anglo-Russian Entente1907Bosnian Crisis1908–1909Agadir Crisis1911Italo-Turkish War1911–1912Balkan Wars1912–1913Assassination of Franz Ferdinand1914July Crisis1914

    v
    t
    e

World War I: Mobilized forces per total population (in %)[citation needed ]
World War I (often abbreviated as WWI or WW1), also known as the First World War or the Great War, was a global war originating in Europe that lasted from 28 July 1914 to 11 November 1918. Contemporaneously described as, "the war to end all wars,"[7] it led to the mobilisation of more than 70 million military personnel, including 60 million Europeans, making it one of the largest wars in history.[8][9] It is also one of the deadliest conflicts in history,[10] with an estimated nine million combatants and seven million civilian deaths as a direct result of the war, while resulting genocides and the resulting 1918 influenza pandemic caused another 50 to 100 million deaths worldwide.[11]

On 28 June 1914, Gavrilo Princip, a Bosnian Serb Yugoslav nationalist, assassinated the Austro-Hungarian heir Archduke Franz Ferdinand in Sarajevo, leading to the July Crisis.[12][13] In response, on 23 July Austria-Hungary issued an ultimatum to Serbia. Serbia's reply failed to satisfy the Austrians, and the two moved to a war footing.

A network of interlocking alliances enlarged the crisis from a bilateral issue in the Balkans to one involving most of Europe. By July 1914, the great powers of Europe were divided into two coalitions: the Triple Entente—consisting of France, Russia, and Britain—and the Triple Alliance of Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Italy (the Triple Alliance was primarily defensive in nature, allowing Italy to stay out of the war in 1914).[14] Russia felt it necessary to back Serbia and, after Austria-Hungary shelled the Serbian capital of Belgrade on the 28th, approved partial mobilisation.[15] Full Russian mobilisation was announced on the evening of 30 July; on the 31st, Austria-Hungary and Germany did the same, while Germany demanded Russia demobilise within twelve hours.[16] When Russia failed to comply, Germany declared war on Russia on 1 August in support of Austria-Hungary, with Austria-Hungary following suit on the 6th; France ordered full mobilisation in support of Russia on 2 August.[17]

German strategy for a war on two fronts against France and Russia was to rapidly concentrate the bulk of its army in the West to defeat France within six weeks, then shift forces to the East before Russia could fully mobilise; this was later known as the Schlieffen Plan.[18] On 2 August, Germany demanded free passage through Belgium, an essential element in achieving a quick victory over France.[19] When this was refused, German forces invaded Belgium on 3 August and declared war on France the same day; the Belgian government invoked the 1839 Treaty of London and in compliance with its obligations under this, Britain declared war on Germany on 4 August.[20][21] On 12 August, Britain and France also declared war on Austria-Hungary; on the 23rd, Japan sided with the Entente, seizing German possessions in China and the Pacific. In November 1914, the Ottoman Empire entered the war on the side of the Alliance, opening fronts in the Caucasus, Mesopotamia, and the Sinai Peninsula. The war was fought in and drew upon each power's colonial empire as well, spreading the conflict to Africa and across the globe. The Entente and its allies would eventually become known as the Allied Powers, while the grouping of Austria-Hungary, Germany and their allies would become known as the Central Powers.

The German advance into France was halted at the Battle of the Marne and by the end of 1914, the Western Front settled into a battle of attrition, marked by a long series of trench lines that changed little until 1917 (the Eastern Front, by contrast, was marked by much greater exchanges of territory). In 1915, Italy joined the Allied Powers and opened a front in the Alps. Bulgaria joined the Central Powers in 1915 and Greece joined the Allies in 1917, expanding the war in the Balkans. The United States initially remained neutral, though even while neutral it became an important supplier of war materiel to the Allies. Eventually, after the sinking of American merchant ships by German submarines, the declaration by Germany that its navy would resume unrestricted attacks on neutral shipping, and the revelation that Germany was trying to incite Mexico to make war on the United States, the U.S. declared war on Germany on 6 April 1917. Trained American forces would not begin arriving at the front in large numbers until mid-1918, but ultimately the American Expeditionary Force would reach some two million troops.[22]

Though Serbia was defeated in 1915, and Romania joined the Allied Powers in 1916 only to be defeated in 1917, none of the great powers were knocked out of the war until 1918. The 1917 February Revolution in Russia replaced the Tsarist autocracy with the Provisional Government, but continuing discontent with the cost of the war led to the October Revolution, the creation of the Soviet Socialist Republic, and the signing of the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk by the new government in March 1918, ending Russia's involvement in the war. This allowed the transfer of large numbers of German troops from the East to the Western Front, resulting in the German March 1918 Offensive. This offensive was initially successful, but failed to score a decisive victory and exhausted the last of the German reserves. The Allies rallied and drove the Germans back in their Hundred Days Offensive, a continual series of attacks to which the Germans had no reply.[23] Bulgaria was the first Central Power to sign an armistice—the Armistice of Salonica on 29 September 1918. On 30 October, the Ottoman Empire capitulated, signing the Armistice of Mudros.[24] On 4 November, the Austro-Hungarian empire agreed to the Armistice of Villa Giusti. With its allies defeated, revolution at home, and the military no longer willing to fight, Kaiser Wilhelm abdicated on 9 November and Germany signed an armistice on 11 November 1918, effectively ending the war.

World War I was a significant turning point in the political, cultural, economic, and social climate of the world. It is considered to mark the end of the Second Industrial Revolution and the Pax Britannica. The war and its immediate aftermath sparked numerous revolutions and uprisings. The Big Four (Britain, France, the United States, and Italy) imposed their terms on the defeated powers in a series of treaties agreed at the 1919 Paris Peace Conference, the most well known being the German peace treaty—the Treaty of Versailles.[25] Ultimately, as a result of the war the Austro-Hungarian, German, Ottoman, and Russian Empires ceased to exist, with numerous new states created from their remains. However, despite the conclusive Allied victory (and the creation of the League of Nations during the Peace Conference, intended to prevent future wars), a second world war would follow just over twenty years later.

Contents 

    1  Names 
    2  Background 
        2.1  Political and military alliances 
        2.2  Arms race 
        2.3  Conflicts in the Balkans 
    3  Prelude 
        3.1  Sarajevo assassination 
        3.2  Expansion of violence in Bosnia and Herzegovina 
        3.3  July Crisis 
    4  Progress of the war 
        4.1  Opening hostilities 
            4.1.1  Confusion among the Central Powers 
            4.1.2  Serbian campaign 
            4.1.3  German Offensive in Belgium and France 
            4.1.4  Asia and the Pacific 
            4.1.5  African campaigns 
            4.1.6  Indian support for the Allies 
        4.2  Western Front 
            4.2.1  Trench warfare begins 
            4.2.2  Continuation of trench warfare 
        4.3  Naval war 
        4.4  Southern theatres 
            4.4.1  War in the Balkans 
            4.4.2  Ottoman Empire 
            4.4.3  Italian participation 
            4.4.4  Romanian participation 
        4.5  Eastern Front 
            4.5.1  Initial actions 
            4.5.2  Russian Revolution 
            4.5.3  Czechoslovak Legion 
        4.6  Central Powers peace overtures 
        4.7  1917–1918 
            4.7.1  Developments in 1917 
            4.7.2  Ottoman Empire conflict, 1917–1918 
            4.7.3  15 August 1917: Peace offer by the Pope 
            4.7.4  Entry of the United States 
            4.7.5  German Spring Offensive of 1918 
            4.7.6  New states enter the war 
        4.8  Allied victory: summer 1918 onwards 
            4.8.1  Hundred Days Offensive 
                4.8.1.1  Battle of Albert 
            4.8.2  Allied advance to the Hindenburg Line 
            4.8.3  German Revolution 1918–1919 
            4.8.4  New German government surrenders 
            4.8.5  Armistices and capitulations 
    5  Aftermath 
        5.1  Formal end of the war 
        5.2  Peace treaties and national boundaries 
        5.3  National identities 
        5.4  Health effects 
    6  Technology 
        6.1  Ground warfare 
            6.1.1  Areas taken in major attacks 
        6.2  Naval 
        6.3  Aviation 
    7  War crimes 
        7.1  Baralong incidents 
        7.2  Torpedoing of HMHS Llandovery Castle 
        7.3  Blockade of Germany 
        7.4  Chemical weapons in warfare 
        7.5  Genocide and ethnic cleansing 
            7.5.1  Ottoman Empire 
            7.5.2  Russian Empire 
        7.6  Rape of Belgium 
    8  Soldiers' experiences 
        8.1  Prisoners of war 
        8.2  Military attachés and war correspondents 
    9  Support for the war 
    10  Opposition to the war 
    11  Conscription 
        11.1  Canada 
        11.2  Australia 
        11.3  Britain 
        11.4  United States 
        11.5  Austria-Hungary 
    12  Diplomacy 
    13  Legacy and memory 
        13.1  Historiography 
        13.2  Memorials 
        13.3  Cultural memory 
        13.4  Social trauma 
        13.5  Discontent in Germany 
        13.6  Economic effects 
    14  See also 
    15  Footnotes 
    16  References 
    17  Bibliography 
        17.1  Primary sources 
        17.2  Historiography and memory 
    18  External links 
        18.1  Animated maps 
        18.2  Library guides 

Names 
The term "First World War" was first used in September 1914 by German biologist and philosopher Ernst Haeckel, who claimed that "there is no doubt that the course and character of the feared 'European War' ... will become the first world war in the full sense of the word,"[26] citing a wire service report in The Indianapolis Star on 20 September 1914.

Prior to World War II, the events of 1914–1918 were generally known as the Great War or simply the World War.[27][28] In October 1914, the Canadian magazine Maclean's wrote, "Some wars name themselves. This is the Great War."[29] Contemporary Europeans also referred to it as "the war to end war" or "the war to end all wars" due to their perception of its then-unparalleled scale and devastation.[30] After World War II began in 1939, the terms became more standard, with British Empire historians, including Canadians, favouring "The First World War" and Americans "World War I".[31]

Background 
Main article: Causes of World War I
Political and military alliances 
[Image: Map of Europe focusing on Austria-Hungary and marking central location of ethnic groups in it including Slovaks, Czechs, Slovenes, Croats, Serbs, Romanians, Ukrainians, Poles.]  
Rival military coalitions in 1914: Triple Entente in green; Triple Alliance in brown. Only the Triple Alliance was a formal "alliance"; the others listed were informal patterns of support.
For much of the 19th century, the major European powers had tried to maintain a tenuous balance of power among themselves, resulting in a complex network of political and military alliances.[32] The biggest challenges to this were Britain's withdrawal into so-called splendid isolation, the decline of the Ottoman Empire and the post-1848 rise of Prussia under Otto von Bismarck. Victory in the 1866 Austro-Prussian War established Prussian hegemony in Germany, while victory over France in the 1870–1871 Franco-Prussian War unified the German states into a German Reich under Prussian leadership.

In 1873, to isolate France and avoid a war on two fronts, Bismarck negotiated the League of the Three Emperors (German: Dreikaiserbund) between Austria-Hungary, Russia and Germany. Concerned by Russia's victory in the 1877–1878 Russo-Turkish War and their influence in the Balkans, the League was dissolved in 1878, with Germany and Austria-Hungary subsequently forming the 1879 Dual Alliance; this became the Triple Alliance when Italy joined in 1882.[33] [34]

The practical details of these alliances were limited, since their primary purpose was to ensure cooperation between the three Imperial Powers and isolate France. Attempts by Britain in 1880 to resolve colonial tensions with Russia and diplomatic moves by France led to Bismarck reforming the League in 1881.[35] When the League finally lapsed in 1887, it was replaced by the Reinsurance Treaty, a secret agreement between Germany and Russia to remain neutral if either were attacked by France or Austria-Hungary.

In 1890, the new German Emperor, Kaiser Wilhelm II, forced Bismarck to retire and was persuaded not to renew the Reinsurance Treaty by the new Chancellor, Leo von Caprivi.[36] This allowed France to counteract the Triple Alliance with the Franco-Russian Alliance of 1894 and the 1904 Entente Cordiale with Britain, while in 1907 Britain and Russia signed the Anglo-Russian Convention. The agreements did not constitute formal alliances, but by settling long-standing colonial disputes, they made British entry into any future conflict involving France or Russia a possibility; these interlocking bilateral agreements became known as the Triple Entente.[37]

Arms race 
SMS Rheinland, a Nassau-class battleship, Germany's first response to the British Dreadnought
Victory in the 1871 Franco-Prussian War and the creation of the German Reich led to a massive increase in Germany's economic and industrial strength. Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz and Wilhelm II, who became Emperor in 1890, sought to use that to create a Kaiserliche Marine or Imperial German Navy to compete with Britain's Royal Navy for world naval supremacy.[38] Their rationale was based on the ideas of US naval strategist Alfred Mahan, who argued that whoever ruled the sea also ruled the world; Tirpitz had Mahan's books translated into German, while Wilhelm made them required reading for his officers.[39] However, Wilhelm annoyed his ministers by publicly declaring one motive to be his childhood admiration of the Royal Navy, which he had visited "with kind aunts and friendly admirals."[40]

The result was the Anglo-German naval arms race. With the launch of HMS Dreadnought in 1906, the Royal Navy increased its advantage over its German rival and continued to do so.[38] By 1912, the German economy could no longer support both naval expansion and the largest permanent army in Europe, with Chancellor Theobald von Bethmann-Hollweg acknowledging defeat. In many ways, it was a strategic disaster for Germany, diverting huge resources to create a navy large enough to antagonise Britain but not defeat it.

Ending the naval arms race reduced tensions between Britain and Germany but did not lead to reductions elsewhere; in 1913, Germany approved an increase in its standing army by 170,000 men, Russia committed to another 500,000 men over the next three years, while France extended compulsory military service from two to three years. Between 1870 and 1914, total military spending by Austria, Germany, Italy, and Russia increased from £94 million to £394 million (equivalent to £37 billion in 2018). The largest proportional increases occurred in Germany (+73%) and Russia (+39%).[41][dubious  – discuss ]

Conflicts in the Balkans 
[Image: Photo of large white building with one signs saying "Moritz Schiller" and another in Arabic; in front is a cluster of people looking at poster on the wall.]  
Sarajevo citizens reading a poster with the proclamation of the Austrian annexation in 1908
In October 1908, Austria-Hungary precipitated the Bosnian crisis of 1908–1909 by officially annexing the former Ottoman territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which it had occupied since 1878. This angered the Kingdom of Serbia and its patron, the Pan-Slavic and Orthodox Russian Empire. Russian political manoeuvring in the region destabilised peace accords that were already fracturing in the Balkans, which came to be known as the "powder keg of Europe".[42]

In 1912 and 1913, the First Balkan War was fought between the Balkan League and the fracturing Ottoman Empire. The resulting Treaty of London further shrank the Ottoman Empire, creating an independent Albanian state while enlarging the territorial holdings of Bulgaria, Serbia, Montenegro, and Greece. When Bulgaria attacked Serbia and Greece on 16 June 1913, it sparked the 33-day Second Balkan War, by the end of which it lost most of Macedonia to Serbia and Greece, and Southern Dobruja to Romania, further destabilising the region.[43] The Great Powers were able to keep these Balkan conflicts contained, but the next one would spread throughout Europe and beyond.

Prelude  Sarajevo assassination 
Main article: Assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand
This picture is usually associated with the arrest of Gavrilo Princip, although some[44][45] believe it depicts Ferdinand Behr, a bystander.
On 28 June 1914, Archduke Franz Ferdinand, heir presumptive to the Austro-Hungarian Empire, visited the Bosnian capital, Sarajevo. A group of six assassins (Cvjetko Popović, Gavrilo Princip, Muhamed Mehmedbašić, Nedeljko Čabrinović, Trifko Grabež, and Vaso Čubrilović) from the Yugoslavist group Mlada Bosna, supplied with arms by the Serbian Black Hand, gathered on the street where the Archduke's motorcade was to pass, with the intention of assassinating him. The political objective of the assassination was to break off Austria-Hungary's South Slav provinces, which Austria-Hungary had annexated from the Ottoman Empire, so they could be combined into a Yugoslavia.

Čabrinović threw a grenade at the car, but missed. Some nearby were injured by the blast, but Ferdinand's convoy carried on. The other assassins failed to act as the cars drove past them.

About an hour later, when Ferdinand was returning from a visit at the Sarajevo Hospital with those wounded in the assassination attempt, the convoy took a wrong turn into a street where, by coincidence, Princip stood. With a pistol, Princip shot and killed Ferdinand and his wife Sophie. Although they were reportedly not personally close, the Emperor Franz Joseph was profoundly shocked and upset. The reaction among the people in Austria, however, was mild, almost indifferent. As historian Zbyněk Zeman later wrote, "the event almost failed to make any impression whatsoever. On Sunday and Monday (28 and 29 June), the crowds in Vienna listened to music and drank wine, as if nothing had happened."[46][47] Nevertheless, the political effect of the murder of the heir to the throne was significant, and was described by historian Christopher Clark on the BBC Radio 4 series Month of Madness as a "9/11 effect, a terrorist event charged with historic meaning, transforming the political chemistry in Vienna."[48]

Expansion of violence in Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Crowds on the streets in the aftermath of the anti-Serb riots in Sarajevo, 29 June 1914
The Austro-Hungarian authorities encouraged the subsequent anti-Serb riots in Sarajevo, in which Bosnian Croats and Bosniaks killed two Bosnian Serbs and damaged numerous Serb-owned buildings.[49][50] Violent actions against ethnic Serbs were also organised outside Sarajevo, in other cities in Austro-Hungarian-controlled Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Slovenia. Austro-Hungarian authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina imprisoned and extradited approximately 5,500 prominent Serbs, 700 to 2,200 of whom died in prison. A further 460 Serbs were sentenced to death. A predominantly Bosniak special militia known as the Schutzkorps was established and carried out the persecution of Serbs.[51][52][53][54]

July Crisis 
Main article: July Crisis
The assassination led to a month of diplomatic manoeuvring between Austria-Hungary, Germany, Russia, France and Britain, called the July Crisis. Austria-Hungary correctly believed that Serbian officials (especially the officers of the Black Hand) were involved in the plot to murder the Archduke, and wanted to finally end Serbian interference in Bosnia.[55] On 23 July, Austria-Hungary delivered to Serbia the July Ultimatum, a series of ten demands that were made intentionally unacceptable, in an effort to provoke a war with Serbia.[56] Serbia decreed general mobilisation on the 25th. Serbia accepted all of the terms of the ultimatum except for article six, which demanded that Austrian delegates be allowed in Serbia for the purpose of participation in the investigation into the assassination.[57] Following this, Austria broke off diplomatic relations with Serbia and, the next day, ordered a partial mobilisation. Finally, on 28 July 1914, a month after the assassination, Austria-Hungary declared war on Serbia.

Ethno-linguistic map of Austria-Hungary, 1910. Bosnia-Herzegovina was annexed in 1908.
On 29 July, Russia, in support of Serbia, declared partial mobilisation against Austria-Hungary.[58] On the 30th, Russia ordered general mobilisation. German Chancellor Bethmann-Hollweg waited until the 31st for an appropriate response, when Germany declared Erklärung des Kriegszustandes, or "Statement on the war status".[16][59] Kaiser Wilhelm II asked his cousin, Tsar Nicolas II, to suspend the Russian general mobilisation. When he refused, Germany issued an ultimatum demanding its mobilisation be stopped, and a commitment not to support Serbia. Another was sent to France, asking her not to support Russia if it were to come to the defence of Serbia. On 1 August, after the Russian response, Germany mobilised and declared war on Russia. This also led to the general mobilisation in Austria-Hungary on 4 August.

The German government issued demands to France that it remain neutral as they had to decide which deployment plan to implement, it being extremely difficult to change the deployment whilst it was underway. The modified German Schlieffen Plan, Aufmarsch II West, would deploy 80% of the army in the west, while Aufmarsch I Ost and Aufmarsch II Ost would deploy 60% in the west and 40% in the east. The French did not respond, but sent a mixed message by ordering their troops to withdraw 10 km (6 mi) from the border to avoid any incidents, and at the same time ordered the mobilisation of their reserves. Germany responded by mobilising its own reserves and implementing Aufmarsch II West.

On 1 August, Wilhelm ordered General Helmuth von Moltke the Younger to "march the whole of the ... army to the East" after being wrongly informed that the British would remain neutral if France was not attacked. Moltke told the Kaiser that attempting to redeploy a million men was unthinkable, and that making it possible for the French to attack the Germans "in the rear" would prove disastrous. Yet Wilhelm insisted that the German army should not march into Luxembourg until he received a telegram sent by his cousin George V, who made it clear that there had been a misunderstanding. Eventually the Kaiser told Moltke, "Now you can do what you want."[60][61]

On 2 August, Germany occupied Luxembourg, and on 3 August declared war on France; on the same day, they sent the Belgian government an ultimatum demanding unimpeded right of way through any part of Belgium, which was refused. Early on the morning of 4 August, the Germans invaded; King Albert ordered his military to resist and called for assistance under the 1839 Treaty of London.[62][63][64] Britain demanded Germany comply with the Treaty and respect Belgian neutrality; it declared war on Germany at 19:00 UTC on 4 August 1914 (effective from 23:00), following an "unsatisfactory reply".[65]

Progress of the war 
Further information: Diplomatic history of World War I
Opening hostilities  Confusion among the Central Powers 
The strategy of the Central Powers suffered from miscommunication. Germany had promised to support Austria-Hungary's invasion of Serbia, but interpretations of what this meant differed. Previously tested deployment plans had been replaced early in 1914, but those had never been tested in exercises. Austro-Hungarian leaders believed Germany would cover its northern flank against Russia.[66] Germany, however, envisioned Austria-Hungary directing most of its troops against Russia, while Germany dealt with France. This confusion forced the Austro-Hungarian Army to divide its forces between the Russian and Serbian fronts.

Serbian campaign 
Main article: Serbian Campaign of World War I
Serbian Army Blériot XI "Oluj", 1915
Austria invaded and fought the Serbian army at the Battle of Cer and Battle of Kolubara beginning on 12 August. Over the next two weeks, Austrian attacks were thrown back with heavy losses, which marked the first major Allied victories of the war and dashed Austro-Hungarian hopes of a swift victory. As a result, Austria had to keep sizeable forces on the Serbian front, weakening its efforts against Russia.[67] Serbia's defeat of the Austro-Hungarian invasion of 1914 has been called one of the major upset victories of the twentieth century.[68] The campaign saw the very first use of medical evacuation by the Serbian army in autumn of 1915 and anti-aircraft warfare in the spring of 1915 after an Austrian plane was shot down with ground-to-air fire.[69][70]

German Offensive in Belgium and France 
Main article: Western Front (World War I)
German soldiers in a railway goods wagon on the way to the front in 1914. Early in the war, all sides expected the conflict to be a short one.
French bayonet charge, Battle of the Frontiers; by the end of August, French casualties exceeded 260,000, including 75,000 dead.
When the war began, the German Order of Battle placed 80% of the army in the West, with the remainder acting as a screening force in the East. The plan was to quickly knock France out of the war, then redeploy to the East and do the same to Russia.

The German offensive in the West was officially titled Aufmarsch II West, but is better known as the Schlieffen Plan, after its original creator. Schlieffen deliberately kept the German left (i.e. its positions in Alsace-Lorraine) weak to lure the French into attacking there, while the majority were allocated to the German right, so as to sweep through Belgium, encircle Paris and trap the French armies against the Swiss border (the French charged into Alsace-Lorraine on the outbreak of war as envisaged by their Plan XVII, thus actually aiding this strategy).[71] However, Schlieffen's successor Moltke grew concerned that the French might push too hard on his left flank. As such, as the German Army increased in size in the years leading up to the war, he changed the allocation of forces between the German right and left wings from 85:15 to 70:30. Ultimately, Moltke's changes meant insufficient forces to achieve decisive success and thus unrealistic goals and timings.[72][dubious  – discuss ]

The initial German advance in the West was very successful: by the end of August the Allied left, which included the British Expeditionary Force (BEF), was in full retreat; French casualties in the first month exceeded 260,000, including 27,000 killed on 22 August during the Battle of the Frontiers.[73] German planning provided broad strategic instructions, while allowing army commanders considerable freedom in carrying them out at the front; this worked well in 1866 and 1870 but in 1914, von Kluck used this freedom to disobey orders, opening a gap between the German armies as they closed on Paris.[74] The French and British exploited this gap to halt the German advance east of Paris at the First Battle of the Marne from 5 to 12 September and push the German forces back some 50 km (31 mi).

In 1911, the Russian Stavka had agreed with the French to attack Germany within 15 days of mobilisation; this was unrealistic and the two Russian armies that entered East Prussia on 17 August did so without many of their support elements.[75] The Russian Second Army was effectively destroyed at the Battle of Tannenberg on 26–30 August but the Russian advance caused the Germans to re-route their 8th Field Army from France to East Prussia, a factor in Allied victory on the Marne.[citation needed ]

By the end of 1914, German troops held strong defensive positions inside France, controlled the bulk of France's domestic coalfields and had inflicted 230,000 more casualties than it lost itself. However, communications problems and questionable command decisions cost Germany the chance of a decisive outcome while it had failed to achieve the primary objective of avoiding a long, two-front war.[76] This amounted to a strategic defeat; shortly after the Marne, Crown Prince Wilhelm told an American reporter; "We have lost the war. It will go on for a long time but lost it is already."[77]

Asia and the Pacific 
Main article: Asian and Pacific theatre of World War I
World empires and colonies around 1914
New Zealand occupied German Samoa (later Western Samoa) on 30 August 1914. On 11 September, the Australian Naval and Military Expeditionary Force landed on the island of Neu Pommern (later New Britain), which formed part of German New Guinea. On 28 October, the German cruiser SMS Emden sank the Russian cruiser Zhemchug in the Battle of Penang. Japan seized Germany's Micronesian colonies and, after the Siege of Tsingtao, the German coaling port of Qingdao on the Chinese Shandong peninsula. As Vienna refused to withdraw the Austro-Hungarian cruiser SMS Kaiserin Elisabeth from Tsingtao, Japan declared war not only on Germany, but also on Austria-Hungary; the ship participated in the defence of Tsingtao where it was sunk in November 1914.[78] Within a few months, the Allied forces had seized all the German territories in the Pacific; only isolated commerce raiders and a few holdouts in New Guinea remained.[79][80]

African campaigns 
Main article: African theatre of World War I
Military recruitment near Tiberias, Ottoman Empire, 1914
Some of the first clashes of the war involved British, French, and German colonial forces in Africa. On 6–7 August, French and British troops invaded the German protectorate of Togoland and Kamerun. On 10 August, German forces in South-West Africa attacked South Africa; sporadic and fierce fighting continued for the rest of the war. The German colonial forces in German East Africa, led by Colonel Paul von Lettow-Vorbeck, fought a guerrilla warfare campaign during World War I and only surrendered two weeks after the armistice took effect in Europe.[81]

Indian support for the Allies 
Further information: Hindu–German Conspiracy, Niedermayer–Hentig Expedition, and Third Anglo-Afghan War
Germany attempted to use Indian nationalism and pan-Islamism to its advantage, instigating uprisings in India, and sending a mission that urged Afghanistan to join the war on the side of Central Powers. However, contrary to British fears of a revolt in India, the outbreak of the war saw an unprecedented outpouring of loyalty and goodwill towards Britain.[82][83] Indian political leaders from the Indian National Congress and other groups were eager to support the British war effort, since they believed that strong support for the war effort would further the cause of Indian Home Rule.[citation needed ] The Indian Army in fact outnumbered the British Army at the beginning of the war; about 1.3 million Indian soldiers and labourers served in Europe, Africa, and the Middle East, while the central government and the princely states sent large supplies of food, money, and ammunition. In all, 140,000 men served on the Western Front and nearly 700,000 in the Middle East. Casualties of Indian soldiers totalled 47,746 killed and 65,126 wounded during World War I.[84] The suffering engendered by the war, as well as the failure of the British government to grant self-government to India after the end of hostilities, bred disillusionment and fuelled the campaign for full independence that would be led by Mohandas K. Gandhi and others.[85]

Western Front 
Main article: Western Front (World War I)
Trench warfare begins 
Trenches of the 11th Cheshire Regiment at Ovillers-la-Boisselle, on the Somme, July 1916
Military tactics developed before World War I failed to keep pace with advances in technology and had become obsolete. These advances had allowed the creation of strong defensive systems, which out-of-date military tactics could not break through for most of the war. Barbed wire was a significant hindrance to massed infantry advances, while artillery, vastly more lethal than in the 1870s, coupled with machine guns, made crossing open ground extremely difficult.[86] Commanders on both sides failed to develop tactics for breaching entrenched positions without heavy casualties. In time, however, technology began to produce new offensive weapons, such as gas warfare and the tank.[87]

After the First Battle of the Marne (5–12 September 1914), Allied and German forces unsuccessfully tried to outflank each other, a series of manoeuvres later known as the "Race to the Sea". By the end of 1914, the opposing forces were left confronting each other along an uninterrupted line of entrenched positions from Alsace to Belgium's North Sea coast.[12] Since the Germans were able to choose where to stand, they normally had the advantage of the high ground; in addition, their trenches tended to be better built, since Anglo-French trenches were initially intended as "temporary," preparatory to breaking the German defences.[88]

Both sides tried to break the stalemate using scientific and technological advances. On 22 April 1915, at the Second Battle of Ypres, the Germans (violating the Hague Convention) used chlorine gas for the first time on the Western Front. Several types of gas soon became widely used by both sides, and though it never proved a decisive, battle-winning weapon, poison gas became one of the most-feared and best-remembered horrors of the war.[89][90] Tanks were developed by Britain and France and were first used in combat by the British during the Battle of Flers–Courcelette (part of the Battle of the Somme) on 15 September 1916, with only partial success. However, their effectiveness would grow as the war progressed; the Allies built tanks in large numbers, whilst the Germans employed only a few of their own design, supplemented by captured Allied tanks.

Continuation of trench warfare 
French 87th regiment near Verdun, 1916
Neither side proved able to deliver a decisive blow for the next two years. Throughout 1915–17, the British Empire and France suffered more casualties than Germany, because of both the strategic and tactical stances chosen by the sides. Strategically, while the Germans only mounted one major offensive, the Allies made several attempts to break through the German lines.

In February 1916 the Germans attacked French defensive positions at the Battle of Verdun, lasting until December 1916. The Germans made initial gains, before French counter-attacks returned matters to near their starting point. Casualties were greater for the French, but the Germans bled heavily as well, with anywhere from 700,000[91] to 975,000[92] casualties suffered between the two combatants. Verdun became a symbol of French determination and self-sacrifice.[93]

[Image: Mud stained British soldiers at rest]  
Royal Irish Rifles in a communications trench, first day on the Somme, 1916
The Battle of the Somme was an Anglo-French offensive of July to November 1916. The opening day of the offensive (1 July 1916) was the bloodiest day in the history of the British Army, suffering 57,470 casualties, including 19,240 dead. The entire Somme offensive cost the British Army some 420,000 casualties. The French suffered another estimated 200,000 casualties and the Germans an estimated 500,000.[94] Gun fire wasn't the only factor taking lives; the diseases that emerged in the trenches were a major killer on both sides. The living conditions made it so that countless diseases and infections occurred, such as trench foot, shell shock, blindness/burns from mustard gas, lice, trench fever, cooties (body lice) and the ‘Spanish Flu’.[95][unreliable source? ]

To maintain morale, wartime censors minimised early reports of widespread influenza illness and mortality in Germany, the United Kingdom, France, and the United States.[96][97] Papers were free to report the epidemic's effects in neutral Spain (such as the grave illness of King Alfonso XIII).[98] This created a false impression of Spain as especially hard hit,[99] thereby giving rise to the pandemic's nickname, "Spanish Flu".[100]

[Image: Files of soldiers with rifles slung follow close behind a tank, there is a dead body in the foreground]  
Canadian troops advancing with a British Mark II tank at the Battle of Vimy Ridge, 1917
Protracted action at Verdun throughout 1916,[101] combined with the bloodletting at the Somme, brought the exhausted French army to the brink of collapse. Futile attempts using frontal assault came at a high price for both the British and the French and led to the widespread French Army Mutinies, after the failure of the costly Nivelle Offensive of April–May 1917.[102] The concurrent British Battle of Arras was more limited in scope, and more successful, although ultimately of little strategic value.[103][104] A smaller part of the Arras offensive, the capture of Vimy Ridge by the Canadian Corps, became highly significant to that country: the idea that Canada's national identity was born out of the battle is an opinion widely held in military and general histories of Canada.[105][106]

The last large-scale offensive of this period was a British attack (with French support) at Passchendaele (July–November 1917). This offensive opened with great promise for the Allies, before bogging down in the October mud. Casualties, though disputed, were roughly equal, at some 200,000–400,000 per side.

The years of trench warfare on the Western front achieved no major exchanges of territory and, as a result, are often thought of as static and unchanging. However, throughout this period, British, French, and German tactics constantly evolved to meet new battlefield challenges.

Naval war 
Main article: Naval warfare of World War I
King George V (front left) and a group of officials inspect a British munitions factory in 1917.
At the start of the war, the German Empire had cruisers scattered across the globe, some of which were subsequently used to attack Allied merchant shipping. The British Royal Navy systematically hunted them down, though not without some embarrassment from its inability to protect Allied shipping. Before the beginning of the war, it was widely understood that Britain held the position of strongest, most influential navy in the world.[107][unreliable source? ] The publishing of the book The Influence of Sea Power upon History by Alfred Thayer Mahan in 1890 was intended to encourage the United States to increase their naval power. Instead, this book made it to Germany and inspired its readers to try to over-power the British Royal Navy.[108] For example, the German detached light cruiser SMS Emden, part of the East Asia Squadron stationed at Qingdao, seized or destroyed 15 merchantmen, as well as sinking a Russian cruiser and a French destroyer. However, most of the German East-Asia squadron—consisting of the armoured cruisers SMS Scharnhorst and Gneisenau, light cruisers Nürnberg and Leipzig and two transport ships—did not have orders to raid shipping and was instead underway to Germany when it met British warships. The German flotilla and Dresden sank two armoured cruisers at the Battle of Coronel, but was virtually destroyed at the Battle of the Falkland Islands in December 1914, with only Dresden and a few auxiliaries escaping, but after the Battle of Más a Tierra these too had been destroyed or interned.[109]

Battleships of the Hochseeflotte, 1917
U-155 exhibited near Tower Bridge in London, after the 1918 Armistice
Soon after the outbreak of hostilities, Britain began a naval blockade of Germany. The strategy proved effective, cutting off vital military and civilian supplies, although this blockade violated accepted international law codified by several international agreements of the past two centuries.[110] Britain mined international waters to prevent any ships from entering entire sections of ocean, causing danger to even neutral ships.[111] Since there was limited response to this tactic of the British, Germany expected a similar response to its unrestricted submarine warfare.[112]

The Battle of Jutland (German: Skagerrakschlacht, or "Battle of the Skagerrak") in May/June 1916 developed into the largest naval battle of the war. It was the only full-scale clash of battleships during the war, and one of the largest in history. The Kaiserliche Marine's High Seas Fleet, commanded by Vice Admiral Reinhard Scheer, fought the Royal Navy's Grand Fleet, led by Admiral Sir John Jellicoe. The engagement was a stand off, as the Germans were outmanoeuvred by the larger British fleet, but managed to escape and inflicted more damage to the British fleet than they received. Strategically, however, the British asserted their control of the sea, and the bulk of the German surface fleet remained confined to port for the duration of the war.[113]

German U-boats attempted to cut the supply lines between North America and Britain.[114] The nature of submarine warfare meant that attacks often came without warning, giving the crews of the merchant ships little hope of survival.[114][115] The United States launched a protest, and Germany changed its rules of engagement. After the sinking of the passenger ship RMS Lusitania in 1915, Germany promised not to target passenger liners, while Britain armed its merchant ships, placing them beyond the protection of the "cruiser rules", which demanded warning and movement of crews to "a place of safety" (a standard that lifeboats did not meet).[116] Finally, in early 1917, Germany adopted a policy of unrestricted submarine warfare, realising that the Americans would eventually enter the war.[114][117] Germany sought to strangle Allied sea lanes before the United States could transport a large army overseas, but after initial successes eventually failed to do so.[114]

The U-boat threat lessened in 1917, when merchant ships began travelling in convoys, escorted by destroyers. This tactic made it difficult for U-boats to find targets, which significantly lessened losses; after the hydrophone and depth charges were introduced, accompanying destroyers could attack a submerged submarine with some hope of success. Convoys slowed the flow of supplies, since ships had to wait as convoys were assembled. The solution to the delays was an extensive program of building new freighters. Troopships were too fast for the submarines and did not travel the North Atlantic in convoys.[118] The U-boats had sunk more than 5,000 Allied ships, at a cost of 199 submarines.[119]

World War I also saw the first use of aircraft carriers in combat, with HMS Furious launching Sopwith Camels in a successful raid against the Zeppelin hangars at Tondern in July 1918, as well as blimps for antisubmarine patrol.[120]

Southern theatres  War in the Balkans 
Main articles: Balkans Campaign (World War I), Bulgaria during World War I, Serbian Campaign (World War I), and Macedonian Front
Refugee transport from Serbia in Leibnitz, Styria, 1914
Bulgarian soldiers in a trench, preparing to fire against an incoming aeroplane
Austro-Hungarian troops executing captured Serbians, 1917. Serbia lost about 850,000 people during the war, a quarter of its pre-war population.[121]
Faced with Russia in the east, Austria-Hungary could spare only one-third of its army to attack Serbia. After suffering heavy losses, the Austrians briefly occupied the Serbian capital, Belgrade. A Serbian counter-attack in the Battle of Kolubara succeeded in driving them from the country by the end of 1914. For the first ten months of 1915, Austria-Hungary used most of its military reserves to fight Italy. German and Austro-Hungarian diplomats, however, scored a coup by persuading Bulgaria to join the attack on Serbia.[122] The Austro-Hungarian provinces of Slovenia, Croatia and Bosnia provided troops for Austria-Hungary in the fight with Serbia, Russia and Italy. Montenegro allied itself with Serbia.[123]

Bulgaria declared war on Serbia on 12 October 1915 and joined in the attack by the Austro-Hungarian army under Mackensen's army of 250,000 that was already underway. Serbia was conquered in a little more than a month, as the Central Powers, now including Bulgaria, sent in 600,000 troops total. The Serbian army, fighting on two fronts and facing certain defeat, retreated into northern Albania. The Serbs suffered defeat in the Battle of Kosovo. Montenegro covered the Serbian retreat towards the Adriatic coast in the Battle of Mojkovac in 6–7 January 1916, but ultimately the Austrians also conquered Montenegro. The surviving Serbian soldiers were evacuated by ship to Greece.[124] After conquest, Serbia was divided between Austro-Hungary and Bulgaria.[125]

In late 1915, a Franco-British force landed at Salonica in Greece to offer assistance and to pressure its government to declare war against the Central Powers. However, the pro-German King Constantine I dismissed the pro-Allied government of Eleftherios Venizelos before the Allied expeditionary force arrived.[126] The friction between the King of Greece and the Allies continued to accumulate with the National Schism, which effectively divided Greece between regions still loyal to the king and the new provisional government of Venizelos in Salonica. After intense negotiations and an armed confrontation in Athens between Allied and royalist forces (an incident known as Noemvriana), the King of Greece resigned and his second son Alexander took his place; Greece officially joined the war on the side of the Allies in June 1917.

The Macedonian Front was initially mostly static. French and Serbian forces retook limited areas of Macedonia by recapturing Bitola on 19 November 1916 following the costly Monastir Offensive, which brought stabilisation of the front.[127]

Serbian and French troops finally made a breakthrough in September 1918 in the Vardar Offensive, after most of the German and Austro-Hungarian troops had been withdrawn. The Bulgarians were defeated at the Battle of Dobro Pole, and by 25 September British and French troops had crossed the border into Bulgaria proper as the Bulgarian army collapsed. Bulgaria capitulated four days later, on 29 September 1918.[128] The German high command responded by despatching troops to hold the line, but these forces were far too weak to reestablish a front.[129]

The disappearance of the Macedonian Front meant that the road to Budapest and Vienna was now opened to Allied forces. Hindenburg and Ludendorff concluded that the strategic and operational balance had now shifted decidedly against the Central Powers and, a day after the Bulgarian collapse, insisted on an immediate peace settlement.[130]

Ottoman Empire 
Main article: History of the Ottoman Empire during World War I
See also: Middle Eastern theatre of World War I
Australian troops charging near a Turkish trench during the Gallipoli Campaign
The Ottomans threatened Russia's Caucasian territories and Britain's communications with India via the Suez Canal. As the conflict progressed, the Ottoman Empire took advantage of the European powers' preoccupation with the war and conducted large-scale ethnic cleansing of the indigenous Armenian, Greek, and Assyrian Christian populations, known as the Armenian Genocide, Greek Genocide, and Assyrian Genocide.[131][132][133]

The British and French opened overseas fronts with the Gallipoli (1915) and Mesopotamian campaigns (1914). In Gallipoli, the Ottoman Empire successfully repelled the British, French, and Australian and New Zealand Army Corps (ANZACs). In Mesopotamia, by contrast, after the defeat of the British defenders in the Siege of Kut by the Ottomans (1915–16), British Imperial forces reorganised and captured Baghdad in March 1917. The British were aided in Mesopotamia by local Arab and Assyrian tribesmen, while the Ottomans employed local Kurdish and Turcoman tribes.[134]

Mehmed V greeting Wilhelm II on his arrival at Constantinople
Further to the west, the Suez Canal was defended from Ottoman attacks in 1915 and 1916; in August, a German and Ottoman force was defeated at the Battle of Romani by the ANZAC Mounted Division and the 52nd (Lowland) Infantry Division. Following this victory, an Egyptian Expeditionary Force advanced across the Sinai Peninsula, pushing Ottoman forces back in the Battle of Magdhaba in December and the Battle of Rafa on the border between the Egyptian Sinai and Ottoman Palestine in January 1917.[135]

Russian armies generally had success in the Caucasus. Enver Pasha, supreme commander of the Ottoman armed forces, was ambitious and dreamed of re-conquering central Asia and areas that had been lost to Russia previously. He was, however, a poor commander.[136] He launched an offensive against the Russians in the Caucasus in December 1914 with 100,000 troops, insisting on a frontal attack against mountainous Russian positions in winter. He lost 86% of his force at the Battle of Sarikamish.[137]

Kaiser Wilhelm II inspecting Turkish troops of the 15th Corps in East Galicia, Austria-Hungary (now Poland). Prince Leopold of Bavaria, the Supreme Commander of the German Army on the Eastern Front, is second from the left.
The Ottoman Empire, with German support, invaded Persia (modern Iran) in December 1914 in an effort to cut off British and Russian access to petroleum reservoirs around Baku near the Caspian Sea.[138] Persia, ostensibly neutral, had long been under the spheres of British and Russian influence. The Ottomans and Germans were aided by Kurdish and Azeri forces, together with a large number of major Iranian tribes, such as the Qashqai, Tangistanis, Luristanis, and Khamseh, while the Russians and British had the support of Armenian and Assyrian forces. The Persian Campaign was to last until 1918 and end in failure for the Ottomans and their allies. However, the Russian withdrawal from the war in 1917 led to Armenian and Assyrian forces, who had hitherto inflicted a series of defeats upon the forces of the Ottomans and their allies, being cut off from supply lines, outnumbered, outgunned and isolated, forcing them to fight and flee towards British lines in northern Mesopotamia.[139]

Russian forest trench at the Battle of Sarikamish, 1914–1915
General Yudenich, the Russian commander from 1915 to 1916, drove the Turks out of most of the southern Caucasus with a string of victories.[137] In 1917, Russian Grand Duke Nicholas assumed command of the Caucasus front. Nicholas planned a railway from Russian Georgia to the conquered territories, so that fresh supplies could be brought up for a new offensive in 1917. However, in March 1917 (February in the pre-revolutionary Russian calendar), the Czar abdicated in the course of the February Revolution, and the Russian Caucasus Army began to fall apart.

The Arab Revolt, instigated by the Arab bureau of the British Foreign Office, started June 1916 with the Battle of Mecca, led by Sherif Hussein of Mecca, and ended with the Ottoman surrender of Damascus. Fakhri Pasha, the Ottoman commander of Medina, resisted for more than two and half years during the Siege of Medina before surrendering in January 1919.[140]

The Senussi tribe, along the border of Italian Libya and British Egypt, incited and armed by the Turks, waged a small-scale guerrilla war against Allied troops. The British were forced to dispatch 12,000 troops to oppose them in the Senussi Campaign. Their rebellion was finally crushed in mid-1916.[141]

Total Allied casualties on the Ottoman fronts amounted 650,000 men. Total Ottoman casualties were 725,000 (325,000 dead and 400,000 wounded).[142]

Italian participation 
Main articles: Italian Front (World War I) and Military history of Italy during World War I
See also: Albania during World War I
A pro-war demonstration in Bologna, Italy, 1914
Italy had been allied with the German and Austro-Hungarian Empires since 1882 as part of the Triple Alliance. However, the nation had its own designs on Austrian territory in Trentino, the Austrian Littoral, Fiume (Rijeka) and Dalmatia. Rome had a secret 1902 pact with France, effectively nullifying its part in the Triple Alliance;[143] Italy secretly agreed with France to remain neutral if the latter was attacked by Germany.[14] At the start of hostilities, Italy refused to commit troops, arguing that the Triple Alliance was defensive and that Austria-Hungary was an aggressor. The Austro-Hungarian government began negotiations to secure Italian neutrality, offering the French colony of Tunisia in return. The Allies made a counter-offer in which Italy would receive the Southern Tyrol, Austrian Littoral and territory on the Dalmatian coast after the defeat of Austria-Hungary. This was formalised by the Treaty of London. Further encouraged by the Allied invasion of Turkey in April 1915, Italy joined the Triple Entente and declared war on Austria-Hungary on 23 May. Fifteen months later, Italy declared war on Germany.[144]

Austro-Hungarian troops, Tyrol
The Italians had numerical superiority, but this advantage was lost, not only because of the difficult terrain in which the fighting took place, but also because of the strategies and tactics employed.[145] Field Marshal Luigi Cadorna, a staunch proponent of the frontal assault, had dreams of breaking into the Slovenian plateau, taking Ljubljana and threatening Vienna.

On the Trentino front, the Austro-Hungarians took advantage of the mountainous terrain, which favoured the defender. After an initial strategic retreat, the front remained largely unchanged, while Austrian Kaiserschützen and Standschützen engaged Italian Alpini in bitter hand-to-hand combat throughout the summer. The Austro-Hungarians counterattacked in the Altopiano of Asiago, towards Verona and Padua, in the spring of 1916 (Strafexpedition), but made little progress and were defeated by the Italians.[146]

Beginning in 1915, the Italians under Cadorna mounted eleven offensives on the Isonzo front along the Isonzo (Soča) River, northeast of Trieste. Of this eleven offensives, five were won by Italy, three remained inconclusive, and other three were repelled by the Austro-Hungarians, who held the higher ground. In the summer of 1916, after the Battle of Doberdò, the Italians captured the town of Gorizia. After this victory, the front remained static for over a year, despite several Italian offensives, centred on the Banjšice and Karst Plateau east of Gorizia.

Depiction of the Battle of Doberdò, fought in August 1916 between the Italian and the Austro-Hungarian armies
The Central Powers launched a crushing offensive on 26 October 1917, spearheaded by the Germans, and achieved a victory at Caporetto (Kobarid). The Italian Army was routed and retreated more than 100 kilometres (62 mi) to reorganise. The new Italian chief of staff, Armando Diaz, ordered the Army to stop their retreat and defend the Monte Grappa summit, where fortified defenses were constructed; the Italians repelled the Austro-Hungarian and German Army, and stabilised the front at the Piave River. Since the Italian Army had suffered heavy losses in the Battle of Caporetto, the Italian Government ordered conscription of the so-called ' 99 Boys (Ragazzi del '99): all males born in 1899 and prior, who were 18 years old or older. In 1918, the Austro-Hungarians failed to break through in a series of battles on the Piave and were finally decisively defeated in the Battle of Vittorio Veneto in October. On 1 November, the Italian Navy destroyed much of the Austro-Hungarian fleet stationed in Pula, preventing it from being handed over to the new State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs. On 3 November, the Italians invaded Trieste from the sea. On the same day, the Armistice of Villa Giusti was signed. By mid-November 1918, the Italian military occupied the entire former Austrian Littoral and had seized control of the portion of Dalmatia that had been guaranteed to Italy by the London Pact.[147] By the end of hostilities in November 1918,[148] Admiral Enrico Millo declared himself Italy's Governor of Dalmatia.[148] Austria-Hungary surrendered on 11 November 1918.[149][150]

Romanian participation 
Main article: Romania during World War I
Marshal Joffre inspecting Romanian troops, 1916
Romania had been allied with the Central Powers since 1882. When the war began, however, it declared its neutrality, arguing that because Austria-Hungary had itself declared war on Serbia, Romania was under no obligation to join the war. On 4 August 1916, Romania and the Entente signed the Political Treaty and Military Convention, that established the coordinates of Romania's participation in the war. In return, it received the Allies' formal sanction for Transylvania, Banat and other territories of Austria-Hungary to be annexed to Romania. The action had large popular support.[151] On 27 August 1916, the Romanian Army launched an attack against Austria-Hungary, with limited Russian support. The Romanian offensive was initially successful in Transylvania, but a Central Powers counterattack by the drove them back.[152] As a result of the Battle of Bucharest, the Central Powers occupied Bucharest on 6 December 1916. Fighting in Moldova continued in 1917, but Russian withdrawal from the war in late 1917 as a result of the October Revolution meant that Romania was forced to sign an armistice with the Central Powers on 9 December 1917.[153]

Romanian troops during the Battle of Mărăşeşti, 1917
In January 1918, Romanian forces established control over Bessarabia as the Russian Army abandoned the province. Although a treaty was signed by the Romanian and Bolshevik Russian governments following talks between 5 and 9 March 1918 on the withdrawal of Romanian forces from Bessarabia within two months, on 27 March 1918 Romania formally attached Bessarabia, inhabited by a Romanian majority, to its territory, based on a resolution passed by the local assembly of that territory on its unification with Romania.[154]

Romania officially made peace with the Central Powers by signing the Treaty of Bucharest on 7 May 1918. Under the treaty, Romania was obliged to end the war with the Central Powers and make small territorial concessions to Austria-Hungary, ceding control of some passes in the Carpathian Mountains, and to grant oil concessions to Germany. In exchange, the Central Powers recognised the sovereignty of Romania over Bessarabia. The treaty was renounced in October 1918 by the Alexandru Marghiloman government, and Romania nominally re-entered the war on 10 November 1918 against the Central Powers. The next day, the Treaty of Bucharest was nullified by the terms of the Armistice of Compiègne.[155][156] Total Romanian deaths from 1914 to 1918, military and civilian, within contemporary borders, were estimated at 748,000.[157]

Eastern Front 
Main article: Eastern Front (World War I)
Initial actions 
Heir presumptive Karl visiting the fortress of Przemyśl after the first siege. The Russian Siege of Przemyśl was the longest siege of the war.
Russian plans for the start of the war called for simultaneous invasions of Austrian Galicia and East Prussia. Although Russia's initial advance into Galicia was largely successful, it was driven back from East Prussia by Hindenburg and Ludendorff at the battles of Tannenberg and the Masurian Lakes in August and September 1914.[158][159] Russia's less developed industrial base and ineffective military leadership were instrumental in the events that unfolded. By the spring of 1915, the Russians had retreated to Galicia, and, in May, the Central Powers achieved a remarkable breakthrough on Poland's southern frontiers with their Gorlice–Tarnów Offensive.[160] On 5 August, they captured Warsaw and forced the Russians to withdraw from Poland.

Russian Revolution 
Main article: Russian Revolution
Allied troops parade through Vladivostok in armed support of the anti-communist White Army, September 1918
Despite Russia's success in the June 1916 Brusilov Offensive against the Austrians in eastern Galicia,[161] the offensive was undermined by the reluctance of other Russian generals to commit their forces to support the victory. Allied and Russian forces were revived only briefly by Romania's entry into the war on 27 August, as Romania was rapidly defeated by a Central Powers offensive. Meanwhile, unrest grew in Russia as the Tsar remained at the front. The increasingly incompetent rule of Empress Alexandra drew protests and resulted in the murder of her favourite, Rasputin, at the end of 1916.

Territory lost under the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk
In March 1917, demonstrations in Petrograd culminated in the abdication of Tsar Nicholas II and the appointment of a weak Provisional Government, which shared power with the Petrograd Soviet socialists. This arrangement led to confusion and chaos both at the front and at home. The army became increasingly ineffective.[162]

Following the Tsar's abdication, Vladimir Lenin—with the help of the German government—was ushered by train from Switzerland into Russia 16 April 1917.[163] Discontent and the weaknesses of the Provisional Government led to a rise in the popularity of the Bolshevik Party, led by Lenin, which demanded an immediate end to the war. The Revolution of November was followed in December by an armistice and negotiations with Germany. At first, the Bolsheviks refused the German terms, but when German troops began marching across Ukraine unopposed, the new government acceded to the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk on 3 March 1918. The treaty ceded vast territories, including Finland, the Baltic provinces, parts of Poland and Ukraine to the Central Powers.[164] Despite this enormous German success, the manpower required by the Germans to occupy the captured territory may have contributed to the failure of their Spring Offensive, and secured relatively little food or other materiel for the Central Powers war effort.

With the adoption of the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, the Entente no longer existed. The Allied powers led a small-scale invasion of Russia, partly to stop Germany from exploiting Russian resources, and to a lesser extent, to support the "Whites" (as opposed to the "Reds") in the Russian Civil War.[165] Allied troops landed in Arkhangelsk and in Vladivostok as part of the North Russia Intervention.

Czechoslovak Legion 
Main article: Czechoslovak Legion
Czechoslovak Legion, Vladivostok, 1918
The Czechoslovak Legion fought on the side of the Entente. Its goal was to win support for the independence of Czechoslovakia. The Legion in Russia was established in September 1914, in December 1917 in France (including volunteers from America) and in April 1918 in Italy. Czechoslovak Legion troops defeated the Austro-Hungarian army at the Ukrainian village of Zborov, in July 1917. After this success, the number of Czechoslovak legionaries increased, as well as Czechoslovak military power. In the Battle of Bakhmach, the Legion defeated the Germans and forced them to make a truce.

In Russia, they were heavily involved in the Russian Civil War, siding with the Whites against the Bolsheviks, at times controlling most of the Trans-Siberian railway and conquering all the major cities of Siberia. The presence of the Czechoslovak Legion near Yekaterinburg appears to have been one of the motivations for the Bolshevik execution of the Tsar and his family in July 1918. Legionaries arrived less than a week afterwards and captured the city. Because Russia's European ports were not safe, the corps was evacuated by a long detour via the port of Vladivostok. The last transport was the American ship Heffron in September 1920.

Central Powers peace overtures 
"They shall not pass", a phrase typically associated with the defence of Verdun
On 12 December 1916, after ten brutal months of the Battle of Verdun and a successful offensive against Romania, Germany attempted to negotiate a peace with the Allies.[166] However, this attempt was rejected out of hand as a "duplicitous war ruse".[166]

Soon after, the US President, Woodrow Wilson, attempted to intervene as a peacemaker, asking in a note for both sides to state their demands. Lloyd George's War Cabinet considered the German offer to be a ploy to create divisions amongst the Allies. After initial outrage and much deliberation, they took Wilson's note as a separate effort, signalling that the United States was on the verge of entering the war against Germany following the "submarine outrages". While the Allies debated a response to Wilson's offer, the Germans chose to rebuff it in favour of "a direct exchange of views". Learning of the German response, the Allied governments were free to make clear demands in their response of 14 January. They sought restoration of damages, the evacuation of occupied territories, reparations for France, Russia and Romania, and a recognition of the principle of nationalities.[167] This included the liberation of Italians, Slavs, Romanians, Czecho-Slovaks, and the creation of a "free and united Poland".[167] On the question of security, the Allies sought guarantees that would prevent or limit future wars, complete with sanctions, as a condition of any peace settlement.[168] The negotiations failed and the Entente powers rejected the German offer on the grounds that Germany had not put forward any specific proposals.

 1917–1918 
Events of 1917 proved decisive in ending the war, although their effects were not fully felt until 1918.

Developments in 1917 
French Army lookout at his observation post, Haut-Rhin, France, 1917
The British naval blockade began to have a serious impact on Germany. In response, in February 1917, the German General Staff convinced Chancellor Theobald von Bethmann-Hollweg to declare unrestricted submarine warfare, with the goal of starving Britain out of the war. German planners estimated that unrestricted submarine warfare would cost Britain a monthly shipping loss of 600,000 tons. The General Staff acknowledged that the policy would almost certainly bring the United States into the conflict, but calculated that British shipping losses would be so high that they would be forced to sue for peace after five to six months, before American intervention could have an effect. Tonnage sunk rose above 500,000 tons per month from February to July. It peaked at 860,000 tons in April. After July, the newly re-introduced convoy system became effective in reducing the U-boat threat. Britain was safe from starvation, while German industrial output fell, and the United States joined the war far earlier than Germany had anticipated.

On 3 May 1917, during the Nivelle Offensive, the French 2nd Colonial Division, veterans of the Battle of Verdun, refused orders, arriving drunk and without their weapons. Their officers lacked the means to punish an entire division, and harsh measures were not immediately implemented. The French Army Mutinies eventually spread to a further 54 French divisions, and 20,000 men deserted. However, appeals to patriotism and duty, as well as mass arrests and trials, encouraged the soldiers to return to defend their trenches, although the French soldiers refused to participate in further offensive action.[169] Robert Nivelle was removed from command by 15 May, replaced by General Philippe Pétain, who suspended bloody large-scale attacks.

German film crew recording the action
The victory of the Central Powers at the Battle of Caporetto led the Allies to convene the Rapallo Conference at which they formed the Supreme War Council to co-ordinate planning. Previously, British and French armies had operated under separate commands.

In December, the Central Powers signed an armistice with Russia, thus freeing large numbers of German troops for use in the west. With German reinforcements and new American troops pouring in, the outcome was to be decided on the Western Front. The Central Powers knew that they could not win a protracted war, but they held high hopes for success based on a final quick offensive. Furthermore, both sides became increasingly fearful of social unrest and revolution in Europe. Thus, both sides urgently sought a decisive victory.[170]

In 1917, Emperor Charles I of Austria secretly attempted separate peace negotiations with Clemenceau, through his wife's brother Sixtus in Belgium as an intermediary, without the knowledge of Germany. Italy opposed the proposals. When the negotiations failed, his attempt was revealed to Germany, resulting in a diplomatic catastrophe.[171][172]

 Ottoman Empire conflict, 1917–1918 
Main article: Sinai and Palestine Campaign
10.5 cm Feldhaubitze 98/09 and Ottoman artillerymen at Hareira in 1917 before the Southern Palestine offensive
British artillery battery on Mount Scopus in the Battle of Jerusalem, 1917. Foreground, a battery of 16 heavy guns. Background, conical tents and support vehicles.
In March and April 1917, at the First and Second Battles of Gaza, German and Ottoman forces stopped the advance of the Egyptian Expeditionary Force, which had begun in August 1916 at the Battle of Romani.[173][174] At the end of October, the Sinai and Palestine Campaign resumed, when General Edmund Allenby's XXth Corps, XXI Corps and Desert Mounted Corps won the Battle of Beersheba.[175] Two Ottoman armies were defeated a few weeks later at the Battle of Mughar Ridge and, early in December, Jerusalem was captured following another Ottoman defeat at the Battle of Jerusalem.[176][177][178] About this time, Friedrich Freiherr Kress von Kressenstein was relieved of his duties as the Eighth Army's commander, replaced by Djevad Pasha, and a few months later the commander of the Ottoman Army in Palestine, Erich von Falkenhayn, was replaced by Otto Liman von Sanders.[179][180]

Ottoman troops during the Mesopotamian campaign
British troops on the march during the Mesopotamian campaign, 1917
In early 1918, the front line was extended and the Jordan Valley was occupied, following the First Transjordan and the Second Transjordan attacks by British Empire forces in March and April 1918.[181] In March, most of the Egyptian Expeditionary Force's British infantry and Yeomanry cavalry were sent to the Western Front as a consequence of the Spring Offensive. They were replaced by Indian Army units. During several months of reorganisation and training of the summer, a number of attacks were carried out on sections of the Ottoman front line. These pushed the front line north to more advantageous positions for the Entente in preparation for an attack and to acclimatise the newly arrived Indian Army infantry. It was not until the middle of September that the integrated force was ready for large-scale operations.

The reorganised Egyptian Expeditionary Force, with an additional mounted division, broke Ottoman forces at the Battle of Megiddo in September 1918. In two days the British and Indian infantry, supported by a creeping barrage, broke the Ottoman front line and captured the headquarters of the Eighth Army (Ottoman Empire) at Tulkarm, the continuous trench lines at Tabsor, Arara, and the Seventh Army (Ottoman Empire) headquarters at Nablus. The Desert Mounted Corps rode through the break in the front line created by the infantry. During virtually continuous operations by Australian Light Horse, British mounted Yeomanry, Indian Lancers, and New Zealand Mounted Rifle brigades in the Jezreel Valley, they captured Nazareth, Afulah and Beisan, Jenin, along with Haifa on the Mediterranean coast and Daraa east of the Jordan River on the Hejaz railway. Samakh and Tiberias on the Sea of Galilee were captured on the way northwards to Damascus. Meanwhile, Chaytor's Force of Australian light horse, New Zealand mounted rifles, Indian, British West Indies and Jewish infantry captured the crossings of the Jordan River, Es Salt, Amman and at Ziza most of the Fourth Army (Ottoman Empire). The Armistice of Mudros, signed at the end of October, ended hostilities with the Ottoman Empire when fighting was continuing north of Aleppo.

15 August 1917: Peace offer by the Pope 
See also: Pope Benedict XV § Peace efforts
On or shortly before 15 August 1917 Pope Benedict XV made a peace proposal[182] suggesting:

    No annexations
    No indemnities, except to compensate for severe war damage in Belgium and parts of France and of Serbia
    A solution to the problems of Alsace-Lorraine, Trentino and Trieste
    Restoration of the Kingdom of Poland
    Germany to pull out of Belgium and France
    Germany's overseas colonies to be returned to Germany
    General disarmament
    A Supreme Court of arbitration to settle future disputes between nations
    The freedom of the seas
    Abolish all retaliatory economic conflicts
    No point in ordering reparations, because so much damage had been caused to all belligerents

Entry of the United States 
Main article: American entry into World War I
At the outbreak of the war, the United States pursued a policy of non-intervention, avoiding conflict while trying to broker a peace. When the German U-boat U-20 sank the British liner RMS Lusitania on 7 May 1915 with 128 Americans among the dead, President Woodrow Wilson insisted that America is "too proud to fight" but demanded an end to attacks on passenger ships. Germany complied. Wilson unsuccessfully tried to mediate a settlement. However, he also repeatedly warned that the United States would not tolerate unrestricted submarine warfare, in violation of international law. Former president Theodore Roosevelt denounced German acts as "piracy".[183] Wilson was narrowly re-elected in 1916 after campaigning with the slogan "he kept us out of war".[184][185][186]

President Wilson before Congress, announcing the break in official relations with Germany on 3 February 1917
In January 1917, Germany decided to resume unrestricted submarine warfare, realising it would mean American entry. The German Foreign Minister, in the Zimmermann Telegram, invited Mexico to join the war as Germany's ally against the United States. In return, the Germans would finance Mexico's war and help it recover the territories of Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona.[187] The United Kingdom intercepted the message and presented it to the US embassy in the UK. From there it made its way to President Wilson who released the Zimmermann note to the public, and Americans saw it as casus belli. Wilson called on anti-war elements to end all wars, by winning this one and eliminating militarism from the globe. He argued that the war was so important that the US had to have a voice in the peace conference.[188] After the sinking of seven US merchant ships by submarines and the publication of the Zimmermann telegram, Wilson called for war on Germany on 2 April 1917,[189] which the US Congress declared 4 days later.

The United States was never formally a member of the Allies but became a self-styled "Associated Power". The United States had a small army, but, after the passage of the Selective Service Act, it drafted 2.8 million men,[190] and, by summer 1918, was sending 10,000 fresh soldiers to France every day. In 1917, the US Congress granted US citizenship to Puerto Ricans to allow them to be drafted to participate in World War I, as part of the Jones–Shafroth Act. German General Staff assumptions that it would be able to defeat the British and French forces before American troops reinforced them were proven incorrect.[191]

The United States Navy sent a battleship group to Scapa Flow to join with the British Grand Fleet, destroyers to Queenstown, Ireland, and submarines to help guard convoys. Several regiments of US Marines were also dispatched to France. The British and French wanted American units used to reinforce their troops already on the battle lines and not waste scarce shipping on bringing over supplies. General John J. Pershing, American Expeditionary Forces (AEF) commander, refused to break up American units to be used as filler material. As an exception, he did allow African-American combat regiments to be used in French divisions. The Harlem Hellfighters fought as part of the French 16th Division, and earned a unit Croix de Guerre for their actions at Ch'teau-Thierry, Belleau Wood, and Sechault.[192] AEF doctrine called for the use of frontal assaults, which had long since been discarded by British Empire and French commanders due to the large loss of life that resulted.[193]

German Spring Offensive of 1918 
Main article: Spring Offensive
French soldiers under General Gouraud, with machine guns amongst the ruins of a cathedral near the Marne, 1918
Ludendorff drew up plans (codenamed Operation Michael) for the 1918 offensive on the Western Front. The Spring Offensive sought to divide the British and French forces with a series of feints and advances. The German leadership hoped to end the war before significant US forces arrived. The operation commenced on 21 March 1918 with an attack on British forces near Saint-Quentin. German forces achieved an unprecedented advance of 60 kilometres (37 mi).[194]

British and French trenches were penetrated using novel infiltration tactics, also named Hutier tactics after General Oskar von Hutier, by specially trained units called stormtroopers. Previously, attacks had been characterised by long artillery bombardments and massed assaults. In the Spring Offensive of 1918, however, Ludendorff used artillery only briefly and infiltrated small groups of infantry at weak points. They attacked command and logistics areas and bypassed points of serious resistance. More heavily armed infantry then destroyed these isolated positions. This German success relied greatly on the element of surprise.[195][citation not found ]

British 55th Division soldiers blinded by tear gas during the Battle of Estaires, 10 April 1918
The front moved to within 120 kilometres (75 mi) of Paris. Three heavy Krupp railway guns fired 183 shells on the capital, causing many Parisians to flee. The initial offensive was so successful that Kaiser Wilhelm II declared 24 March a national holiday. Many Germans thought victory was near. After heavy fighting, however, the offensive was halted. Lacking tanks or motorised artillery, the Germans were unable to consolidate their gains. The problems of re-supply were also exacerbated by increasing distances that now stretched over terrain that was shell-torn and often impassable to traffic.[196]

General Foch pressed to use the arriving American troops as individual replacements, whereas Pershing sought to field American units as an independent force. These units were assigned to the depleted French and British Empire commands on 28 March. A Supreme War Council of Allied forces was created at the Doullens Conference on 5 November 1917. General Foch was appointed as supreme commander of the Allied forces. Haig, Petain, and Pershing retained tactical control of their respective armies; Foch assumed a co-ordinating rather than a directing role, and the British, French, and US commands operated largely independently.[197]

Following Operation Michael, Germany launched Operation Georgette against the northern English Channel ports. The Allies halted the drive after limited territorial gains by Germany. The German Army to the south then conducted Operations Blücher and Yorck, pushing broadly towards Paris. Germany launched Operation Marne (Second Battle of the Marne) on 15 July, in an attempt to encircle Reims. The resulting counter-attack, which started the Hundred Days Offensive, marked the first successful Allied offensive of the war. By 20 July, the Germans had retreated across the Marne to their starting lines,[198] having achieved little, and the German Army never regained the initiative. German casualties between March and April 1918 were 270,000, including many highly trained stormtroopers.

Meanwhile, Germany was falling apart at home. Anti-war marches became frequent and morale in the army fell. Industrial output was half the 1913 levels.

New states enter the war 
In the late spring of 1918, three new states were formed in the South Caucasus: the First Republic of Armenia, the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic, and the Democratic Republic of Georgia, which declared their independence from the Russian Empire. Two other minor entities were established, the Centrocaspian Dictatorship and South West Caucasian Republic (the former was liquidated by Azerbaijan in the autumn of 1918 and the latter by a joint Armenian-British task force in early 1919). With the withdrawal of the Russian armies from the Caucasus front in the winter of 1917–18, the three major republics braced for an imminent Ottoman advance, which commenced in the early months of 1918. Solidarity was briefly maintained when the Transcaucasian Federative Republic was created in the spring of 1918, but this collapsed in May, when the Georgians asked for and received protection from Germany and the Azerbaijanis concluded a treaty with the Ottoman Empire that was more akin to a military alliance. Armenia was left to fend for itself and struggled for five months against the threat of a full-fledged occupation by the Ottoman Turks before defeating them at the Battle of Sardarabad.[199]

Allied victory: summer 1918 onwards  Hundred Days Offensive 
Main articles: Hundred Days Offensive and Weimar Republic
Between April and November 1918, the Allies increased their front-line rifle strength while German strength fell by half.[200]
Aerial view of ruins of Vaux-devant-Damloup, France, 1918
The Allied counteroffensive, known as the Hundred Days Offensive, began on 8 August 1918, with the Battle of Amiens. The battle involved over 400 tanks and 120,000 British, Dominion, and French troops, and by the end of its first day a gap 24 kilometres (15 mi) long had been created in the German lines. The defenders displayed a marked collapse in morale, causing Ludendorff to refer to this day as the "Black Day of the German army".[201][202][203] After an advance as far as 23 kilometres (14 mi), German resistance stiffened, and the battle was concluded on 12 August.

Rather than continuing the Amiens battle past the point of initial success, as had been done so many times in the past, the Allies shifted attention elsewhere. Allied leaders had now realised that to continue an attack after resistance had hardened was a waste of lives, and it was better to turn a line than to try to roll over it. They began to undertake attacks in quick order to take advantage of successful advances on the flanks, then broke them off when each attack lost its initial impetus.[204]

The day after the Offensive began, Ludendorff said: "We cannot win the war any more, but we must not lose it either." On 11 August he offered his resignation to the Kaiser, who refused it, replying, "I see that we must strike a balance. We have nearly reached the limit of our powers of resistance. The war must be ended." On 13 August, at Spa, Hindenburg, Ludendorff, the Chancellor, and Foreign Minister Hintz agreed that the war could not be ended militarily and, on the following day, the German Crown Council decided that victory in the field was now most improbable. Austria and Hungary warned that they could only continue the war until December, and Ludendorff recommended immediate peace negotiations. Prince Rupprecht warned Prince Max of Baden: "Our military situation has deteriorated so rapidly that I no longer believe we can hold out over the winter; it is even possible that a catastrophe will come earlier."[205]

Battle of Albert 
Canadian Scottish, advancing during the Battle of the Canal du Nord, 1918
British and Dominion forces launched the next phase of the campaign with the Battle of Albert on 21 August.[206] The assault was widened by French[205] and then further British forces in the following days. During the last week of August the Allied pressure along a 110-kilometre (68 mi) front against the enemy was heavy and unrelenting. From German accounts, "Each day was spent in bloody fighting against an ever and again on-storming enemy, and nights passed without sleep in retirements to new lines."[204]

Faced with these advances, on 2 September the German Supreme Army Command issued orders to withdraw in the south to the Hindenburg Line. This ceded without a fight the salient seized the previous April.[207] According to Ludendorff, "We had to admit the necessity ... to withdraw the entire front from the Scarpe to the Vesle.[208] In nearly four weeks of fighting beginning on 8 August, over 100,000 German prisoners were taken. The German High Command realised that the war was lost and made attempts to reach a satisfactory end. On 10 September Hindenburg urged peace moves to Emperor Charles of Austria, and Germany appealed to the Netherlands for mediation. On 14 September Austria sent a note to all belligerents and neutrals suggesting a meeting for peace talks on neutral soil, and on 15 September Germany made a peace offer to Belgium. Both peace offers were rejected.[205]

Allied advance to the Hindenburg Line 
An American major, piloting an observation balloon near the front, 1918
In September the Allies advanced to the Hindenburg Line in the north and centre. The Germans continued to fight strong rear-guard actions and launched numerous counterattacks, but positions and outposts of the Line continued to fall, with the BEF alone taking 30,441 prisoners in the last week of September. On 24 September an assault by both the British and French came within 3 kilometres (2 mi) of St. Quentin. The Germans had now retreated to positions along or behind the Hindenburg Line. That same day, Supreme Army Command informed the leaders in Berlin that armistice talks were inevitable.[205]

The final assault on the Hindenburg Line began with the Meuse-Argonne Offensive, launched by French and American troops on 26 September. The following week, co-operating French and American units broke through in Champagne at the Battle of Blanc Mont Ridge, forcing the Germans off the commanding heights, and closing towards the Belgian frontier.[209] On 8 October the line was pierced again by British and Dominion troops at the Battle of Cambrai.[210] The German army had to shorten its front and use the Dutch frontier as an anchor to fight rear-guard actions as it fell back towards Germany.

When Bulgaria signed a separate armistice on 29 September, Ludendorff, having been under great stress for months, suffered something similar to a breakdown. It was evident that Germany could no longer mount a successful defence. The collapse of the Balkans meant that Germany was about to lose its main supplies of oil and food. Its reserves had been used up, even as US troops kept arriving at the rate of 10,000 per day.[211][212][213] The Americans supplied more than 80% of Allied oil during the war, and there was no shortage.[214]

 German Revolution 1918–1919 
German Revolution, Kiel, 1918
News of Germany's impending military defeat spread throughout the German armed forces. The threat of mutiny was rife. Admiral Reinhard Scheer and Ludendorff decided to launch a last attempt to restore the "valour" of the German Navy.

In northern Germany, the German Revolution of 1918–1919 began at the end of October 1918. Units of the German Navy refused to set sail for a last, large-scale operation in a war they believed to be as good as lost, initiating the uprising. The sailors' revolt, which then ensued in the naval ports of Wilhelmshaven and Kiel, spread across the whole country within days and led to the proclamation of a republic on 9 November 1918, shortly thereafter to the abdication of Kaiser Wilhelm II, and to German surrender.[215][216][217][213]

New German government surrenders 
With the military faltering and with widespread loss of confidence in the Kaiser leading to his abdication and fleeing of the country, Germany moved towards surrender. Prince Maximilian of Baden took charge of a new government on 3 October as Chancellor of Germany to negotiate with the Allies. Negotiations with President Wilson began immediately, in the hope that he would offer better terms than the British and French. Wilson demanded a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary control over the German military.[218] There was no resistance when the Social Democrat Philipp Scheidemann on 9 November declared Germany to be a republic. The Kaiser, kings and other hereditary rulers all were removed from power and Wilhelm fled to exile in the Netherlands. Imperial Germany was dead; a new Germany had been born as the Weimar Republic.[219]

Armistices and capitulations 
Main article: Armistice of 11 November 1918
Italian troops reach Trento during the Battle of Vittorio Veneto, 1918. Italy's victory marked the end of the war on the Italian Front and secured the dissolution of the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
The collapse of the Central Powers came swiftly. Bulgaria was the first to sign an armistice, the Armistice of Salonica on 29 September 1918.[24] On 30 October, the Ottoman Empire capitulated, signing the Armistice of Mudros.[24]

Men of US 64th Regiment, 7th Infantry Division, celebrate the news of the Armistice, 11 November 1918
On 24 October, the Italians began a push that rapidly recovered territory lost after the Battle of Caporetto. This culminated in the Battle of Vittorio Veneto, which marked the end of the Austro-Hungarian Army as an effective fighting force. The offensive also triggered the disintegration of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. During the last week of October, declarations of independence were made in Budapest, Prague, and Zagreb. On 29 October, the imperial authorities asked Italy for an armistice, but the Italians continued advancing, reaching Trento, Udine, and Trieste. On 3 November, Austria-Hungary sent a flag of truce to ask for an armistice (Armistice of Villa Giusti). The terms, arranged by telegraph with the Allied Authorities in Paris, were communicated to the Austrian commander and accepted. The Armistice with Austria was signed in the Villa Giusti, near Padua, on 3 November. Austria and Hungary signed separate armistices following the overthrow of the Habsburg Monarchy. In the following days the Italian Army occupied Innsbruck and all Tyrol with 20 to 22,000 soldiers.[220]

On 11 November, at 5:00 am, an armistice with Germany was signed in a railroad carriage at Compiègne. At 11 am on 11 November 1918—"the eleventh hour of the eleventh day of the eleventh month"—a ceasefire came into effect. During the six hours between the signing of the armistice and its taking effect, opposing armies on the Western Front began to withdraw from their positions, but fighting continued along many areas of the front, as commanders wanted to capture territory before the war ended. The occupation of the Rhineland took place following the Armistice. The occupying armies consisted of American, Belgian, British and French forces.

Ferdinand Foch, second from right, pictured outside the carriage in Compiègne after agreeing to the armistice that ended the war there. The carriage was later chosen by Nazi Germany as the symbolic setting of Pétain's June 1940 armistice.[221]
In November 1918, the Allies had ample supplies of men and materiel to invade Germany. Yet at the time of the armistice, no Allied force had crossed the German frontier, the Western Front was still some 720 kilometres (450 mi) from Berlin, and the Kaiser's armies had retreated from the battlefield in good order. These factors enabled Hindenburg and other senior German leaders to spread the story that their armies had not really been defeated. This resulted in the stab-in-the-back legend,[222][223] which attributed Germany's defeat not to its inability to continue fighting (even though up to a million soldiers were suffering from the 1918 flu pandemic and unfit to fight), but to the public's failure to respond to its "patriotic calling" and the supposed intentional sabotage of the war effort, particularly by Jews, Socialists, and Bolsheviks.

The Allies had much more potential wealth they could spend on the war. One estimate (using 1913 US dollars) is that the Allies spent $58 billion on the war and the Central Powers only $25 billion. Among the Allies, the UK spent $21 billion and the US$17 billion; among the Central Powers Germany spent $20 billion.[224]

Aftermath 
Main article: Aftermath of World War I
In the aftermath of the war, four empires disappeared: the German, Austro-Hungarian, Ottoman, and Russian. Numerous nations regained their former independence, and new ones were created. Four dynasties, together with their ancillary aristocracies, fell as a result of the war: the Romanovs, the Hohenzollerns, the Habsburgs, and the Ottomans. Belgium and Serbia were badly damaged, as was France, with 1.4 million soldiers dead,[225] not counting other casualties. Germany and Russia were similarly affected.[226]

Formal end of the war 
The Italian Redipuglia War Memorial, which contains the remains of 100,187 soldiers
The French military cemetery at the Douaumont ossuary, which contains the remains of more than 130,000 unknown soldiers
A formal state of war between the two sides persisted for another seven months, until the signing of the Treaty of Versailles with Germany on 28 June 1919. The United States Senate did not ratify the treaty despite public support for it,[227][228] and did not formally end its involvement in the war until the Knox–Porter Resolution was signed on 2 July 1921 by President Warren G. Harding.[229] For the United Kingdom and the British Empire, the state of war ceased under the provisions of the Termination of the Present War (Definition) Act 1918 with respect to:

        Germany on 10 January 1920.[230]
        Austria on 16 July 1920.[231]
        Bulgaria on 9 August 1920.[232]
        Hungary on 26 July 1921.[233]
        Turkey on 6 August 1924.[234]

After the Treaty of Versailles, treaties with Austria, Hungary, Bulgaria, and the Ottoman Empire were signed. However, the negotiation of the treaty with the Ottoman Empire was followed by strife, and a final peace treaty between the Allied Powers and the country that would shortly become the Republic of Turkey was not signed until 24 July 1923, at Lausanne.

Some war memorials date the end of the war as being when the Versailles Treaty was signed in 1919, which was when many of the troops serving abroad finally returned home; by contrast, most commemorations of the war's end concentrate on the armistice of 11 November 1918. Legally, the formal peace treaties were not complete until the last, the Treaty of Lausanne, was signed. Under its terms, the Allied forces left Constantinople on 23 August 1923.

Peace treaties and national boundaries 
Greek prime minister Eleftherios Venizelos signing the Treaty of Sèvres
After the war, the Paris Peace Conference imposed a series of peace treaties on the Central Powers officially ending the war. The 1919 Treaty of Versailles dealt with Germany and, building on Wilson's 14th point, brought into being the League of Nations on 28 June 1919.[235][236]

The Central Powers had to acknowledge responsibility for "all the loss and damage to which the Allied and Associated Governments and their nationals have been subjected as a consequence of the war imposed upon them by" their aggression. In the Treaty of Versailles, this statement was Article 231. This article became known as the War Guilt clause as the majority of Germans felt humiliated and resentful.[237] Overall the Germans felt they had been unjustly dealt with by what they called the "diktat of Versailles". German historian Hagen Schulze said the Treaty placed Germany "under legal sanctions, deprived of military power, economically ruined, and politically humiliated."[238] Belgian historian Laurence Van Ypersele emphasises the central role played by memory of the war and the Versailles Treaty in German politics in the 1920s and 1930s:

Active denial of war guilt in Germany and German resentment at both reparations and continued Allied occupation of the Rhineland made widespread revision of the meaning and memory of the war problematic. The legend of the "stab in the back" and the wish to revise the "Versailles diktat", and the belief in an international threat aimed at the elimination of the German nation persisted at the heart of German politics. Even a man of peace such as [Gustav] Stresemann publicly rejected German guilt. As for the Nazis, they waved the banners of domestic treason and international conspiracy in an attempt to galvanise the German nation into a spirit of revenge. Like a Fascist Italy, Nazi Germany sought to redirect the memory of the war to the benefit of its own policies.[239]

The signing of the Treaty of Versailles in the Hall of Mirrors, Versailles, 28 June 1919, by Sir William Orpen
Meanwhile, new nations liberated from German rule viewed the treaty as recognition of wrongs committed against small nations by much larger aggressive neighbours.[240] The Peace Conference required all the defeated powers to pay reparations for all the damage done to civilians. However, owing to economic difficulties and Germany being the only defeated power with an intact economy, the burden fell largely on Germany.

Austria-Hungary was partitioned into several successor states, including Austria, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia, largely but not entirely along ethnic lines. Transylvania was shifted from Hungary to Greater Romania. The details were contained in the Treaty of Saint-Germain and the Treaty of Trianon. As a result of the Treaty of Trianon, 3.3 million Hungarians came under foreign rule. Although the Hungarians made up approximately 54% of the population of the pre-war Kingdom of Hungary (according to the 1910 census), only 32% of its territory was left to Hungary. Between 1920 and 1924, 354,000 Hungarians fled former Hungarian territories attached to Romania, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia.[241]

The Russian Empire, which had withdrawn from the war in 1917 after the October Revolution, lost much of its western frontier as the newly independent nations of Estonia, Finland, Latvia, Lithuania, and Poland were carved from it. Romania took control of Bessarabia in April 1918.[242]

The Ottoman Empire disintegrated, with much of its Levant territory awarded to various Allied powers as protectorates. The Turkish core in Anatolia was reorganised as the Republic of Turkey. The Ottoman Empire was to be partitioned by the Treaty of Sèvres of 1920. This treaty was never ratified by the Sultan and was rejected by the Turkish National Movement, leading to the victorious Turkish War of Independence and the much less stringent 1923 Treaty of Lausanne.

Even though a lot of countries had already made a peace treaty, there was one exception, Andorra. Andorra declared war on Germany in August 1914, but, because it had a very small population, Andorra had never sent any soldiers to the battlefield. Because of that, Andorra wasn't allowed to go to the Treaty of Versailles, so the country hadn't made a peace treaty with Germany until 1958. When Andorra made the declaration of war, it had an army of 600 part-time militarymen, commanded by two officials.[243][244][245][246]

National identities 
Further information: Sykes–Picot Agreement
Map of territorial changes in Europe after World War I (as of 1923)
After 123 years, Poland re-emerged as an independent country. The Kingdom of Serbia and its dynasty, as a "minor Entente nation" and the country with the most casualties per capita,[247][248][249] became the backbone of a new multinational state, the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes, later renamed Yugoslavia. Czechoslovakia, combining the Kingdom of Bohemia with parts of the Kingdom of Hungary, became a new nation. Russia became the Soviet Union and lost Finland, Estonia, Lithuania, and Latvia, which became independent countries. The Ottoman Empire was soon replaced by Turkey and several other countries in the Middle East.

In the British Empire, the war unleashed new forms of nationalism. In Australia and New Zealand the Battle of Gallipoli became known as those nations' "Baptism of Fire". It was the first major war in which the newly established countries fought, and it was one of the first times that Australian troops fought as Australians, not just subjects of the British Crown. Anzac Day, commemorating the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps (ANZAC), celebrates this defining moment.[250][251]

After the Battle of Vimy Ridge, where the Canadian divisions fought together for the first time as a single corps, Canadians began to refer to their country as a nation "forged from fire".[252] Having succeeded on the same battleground where the "mother countries" had previously faltered, they were for the first time respected internationally for their own accomplishments. Canada entered the war as a Dominion of the British Empire and remained so, although it emerged with a greater measure of independence.[253][254] When Britain declared war in 1914, the dominions were automatically at war; at the conclusion, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa were individual signatories of the Treaty of Versailles.[255]

Lobbying by Chaim Weizmann and fear that American Jews would encourage the United States to support Germany culminated in the British government's Balfour Declaration of 1917, endorsing creation of a Jewish homeland in Palestine.[256] A total of more than 1,172,000 Jewish soldiers served in the Allied and Central Power forces in World War I, including 275,000 in Austria-Hungary and 450,000 in Tsarist Russia.[257]

The establishment of the modern state of Israel and the roots of the continuing Israeli–Palestinian conflict are partially found in the unstable power dynamics of the Middle East that resulted from World War I.[258] Before the end of the war, the Ottoman Empire had maintained a modest level of peace and stability throughout the Middle East.[259] With the fall of the Ottoman government, power vacuums developed and conflicting claims to land and nationhood began to emerge.[260] The political boundaries drawn by the victors of World War I were quickly imposed, sometimes after only cursory consultation with the local population. These continue to be problematic in the 21st-century struggles for national identity.[261][262] While the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire at the end of World War I was pivotal in contributing to the modern political situation of the Middle East, including the Arab-Israeli conflict,[263][264][265] the end of Ottoman rule also spawned lesser known disputes over water and other natural resources.[266]

The prestige of Germany and German things in Latin America remained high after the war but did not recovered to its pre-war levels.[267][268] Indeed, in Chile the war bought an end to a period of intense scientific and cultural influence writer Eduardo de la Barra scorningly called "the German bewichment" (Spanish: el embrujamiento alemán).[267]

Health effects 
Transporting Ottoman wounded at Sirkeci
Of the 60 million European military personnel who were mobilised from 1914 to 1918, 8 million were killed, 7 million were permanently disabled, and 15 million were seriously injured. Germany lost 15.1% of its active male population, Austria-Hungary lost 17.1%, and France lost 10.5%.[269] In Germany, civilian deaths were 474,000 higher than in peacetime, due in large part to food shortages and malnutrition that weakened resistance to disease.[270] By the end of the war, starvation caused by famine had killed approximately 100,000 people in Lebanon.[271] Between 5 and 10 million people died in the Russian famine of 1921.[272] By 1922, there were between 4.5 million and 7 million homeless children in Russia as a result of nearly a decade of devastation from World War I, the Russian Civil War, and the subsequent famine of 1920–1922.[273] Numerous anti-Soviet Russians fled the country after the Revolution; by the 1930s, the northern Chinese city of Harbin had 100,000 Russians.[274] Thousands more emigrated to France, England, and the United States.

Emergency military hospital during the Spanish flu pandemic, which killed about 675,000 people in the United States alone, Camp Funston, Kansas, 1918
The Australian prime minister, Billy Hughes, wrote to the British prime minister, Lloyd George, "You have assured us that you cannot get better terms. I much regret it, and hope even now that some way may be found of securing agreement for demanding reparation commensurate with the tremendous sacrifices made by the British Empire and her Allies." Australia received £5,571,720 war reparations, but the direct cost of the war to Australia had been £376,993,052, and, by the mid-1930s, repatriation pensions, war gratuities, interest and sinking fund charges were £831,280,947.[275] Of about 416,000 Australians who served, about 60,000 were killed and another 152,000 were wounded.[276]

Diseases flourished in the chaotic wartime conditions. In 1914 alone, louse-borne epidemic typhus killed 200,000 in Serbia.[277] From 1918 to 1922, Russia had about 25 million infections and 3 million deaths from epidemic typhus.[278] In 1923, 13 million Russians contracted malaria, a sharp increase from the pre-war years.[279] In addition, a major influenza epidemic spread around the world. Overall, the 1918 flu pandemic killed at least 50 million people.[280][281] Moreover, between 1915 and 1926, an epidemic of encephalitis lethargica spread around the world affecting nearly five million people.[282][283]

The social disruption and widespread violence of the Russian Revolution of 1917 and the ensuing Russian Civil War sparked more than 2,000 pogroms in the former Russian Empire, mostly in Ukraine.[284] An estimated 60,000–200,000 civilian Jews were killed in the atrocities.[285]

In the aftermath of World War I, Greece fought against Turkish nationalists led by Mustafa Kemal, a war that eventually resulted in a massive population exchange between the two countries under the Treaty of Lausanne.[286] According to various sources,[287] several hundred thousand Greeks died during this period, which was tied in with the Greek Genocide.[288]

Technology 
See also: Technology during World War I and Weapons of World War I
Ground warfare 
See also: Tanks in World War I
Tanks on parade in London at the end of World War I
World War I began as a clash of 20th-century technology and 19th-century tactics, with the inevitably large ensuing casualties. By the end of 1917, however, the major armies, now numbering millions of men, had modernised and were making use of telephone, wireless communication,[289] armoured cars, tanks,[290] and aircraft. Infantry formations were reorganised, so that 100-man companies were no longer the main unit of manoeuvre; instead, squads of 10 or so men, under the command of a junior NCO, were favoured.

Artillery also underwent a revolution. In 1914, cannons were positioned in the front line and fired directly at their targets. By 1917, indirect fire with guns (as well as mortars and even machine guns) was commonplace, using new techniques for spotting and ranging, notably aircraft and the often overlooked field telephone.[291] Counter-battery missions became commonplace, also, and sound detection was used to locate enemy batteries.

A Russian armoured car, 1919
Germany was far ahead of the Allies in using heavy indirect fire. The German Army employed 150 mm (6 in) and 210 mm (8 in) howitzers in 1914, when typical French and British guns were only 75 mm (3 in) and 105 mm (4 in). The British had a 6-inch (152 mm) howitzer, but it was so heavy it had to be hauled to the field in pieces and assembled. The Germans also fielded Austrian 305 mm (12 in) and 420 mm (17 in) guns and, even at the beginning of the war, had inventories of various calibres of Minenwerfer, which were ideally suited for trench warfare.[292][293]

38-cm "Lange Max" of Koekelare (Leugenboom), biggest gun in the world in 1917
On 27 June 1917 the Germans used the biggest gun in the world, Batterie Pommern, nicknamed "Lange Max". This gun from Krupp was able to shoot 750 kg shells from Koekelare to Dunkirk, a distance of about 50 km (31 mi).

Much of the combat involved trench warfare, in which hundreds often died for each metre gained. Many of the deadliest battles in history occurred during World War I. Such battles include Ypres, the Marne, Cambrai, the Somme, Verdun, and Gallipoli. The Germans employed the Haber process of nitrogen fixation to provide their forces with a constant supply of gunpowder despite the British naval blockade.[294] Artillery was responsible for the largest number of casualties[295] and consumed vast quantities of explosives. The large number of head wounds caused by exploding shells and fragmentation forced the combatant nations to develop the modern steel helmet, led by the French, who introduced the Adrian helmet in 1915. It was quickly followed by the Brodie helmet, worn by British Imperial and US troops, and in 1916 by the distinctive German Stahlhelm, a design, with improvements, still in use today.

Gas! GAS! Quick, boys! – An ecstasy of fumbling,
Fitting the clumsy helmets just in time;
But someone still was yelling out and stumbling,
And flound'ring like a man in fire or lime ...
Dim, through the misty panes and thick green light,
As under a green sea, I saw him drowning.

— Wilfred Owen, Dulce et Decorum est, 1917[296]
A Canadian soldier with mustard gas burns, c. 1917–1918
The widespread use of chemical warfare was a distinguishing feature of the conflict. Gases used included chlorine, mustard gas and phosgene. Relatively few war casualties were caused by gas,[297] as effective countermeasures to gas attacks were quickly created, such as gas masks. The use of chemical warfare and small-scale strategic bombing (as opposed to tactical bombing) were both outlawed by the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907, and both proved to be of limited effectiveness,[298] though they captured the public imagination.[299]

The most powerful land-based weapons were railway guns, weighing dozens of tons apiece.[300] The German version were nicknamed Big Berthas, even though the namesake was not a railway gun. Germany developed the Paris Gun, able to bombard Paris from over 100 kilometres (62 mi), though shells were relatively light at 94 kilograms (210 lb).

British Vickers machine gun, 1917
Trenches, machine guns, air reconnaissance, barbed wire, and modern artillery with fragmentation shells helped bring the battle lines of World War I to a stalemate. The British and the French sought a solution with the creation of the tank and mechanised warfare. The British first tanks were used during the Battle of the Somme on 15 September 1916. Mechanical reliability was an issue, but the experiment proved its worth. Within a year, the British were fielding tanks by the hundreds, and they showed their potential during the Battle of Cambrai in November 1917, by breaking the Hindenburg Line, while combined arms teams captured 8,000 enemy soldiers and 100 guns. Meanwhile, the French introduced the first tanks with a rotating turret, the Renault FT, which became a decisive tool of the victory. The conflict also saw the introduction of light automatic weapons and submachine guns, such as the Lewis Gun, the Browning Automatic Rifle, and the Bergmann MP18.

Another new weapon, the flamethrower, was first used by the German army and later adopted by other forces. Although not of high tactical value, the flamethrower was a powerful, demoralising weapon that caused terror on the battlefield.

Trench railways evolved to supply the enormous quantities of food, water, and ammunition required to support large numbers of soldiers in areas where conventional transportation systems had been destroyed. Internal combustion engines and improved traction systems for automobiles and trucks/lorries eventually rendered trench railways obsolete.

Areas taken in major attacks 
[Image: Attack areas in WW1.jpg]  
On the Western Front neither side made impressive gains in the first three years of the war with attacks at Verdun, the Somme, Passchendaele, and Cambrai — the exception was Nivelle's Offensive in which the German defence gave ground while mauling the attackers so badly that there were mutinies in the French Army. In 1918 the Germans smashed through the defence lines in three great attacks: Michael, on the Lys, and on the Aisne, which displayed the power of their new tactics. The Allies struck back at Soissons, which showed the Germans that they must return to the defensive, and at Amiens; tanks played a prominent role in both of these assaults, as they had the year before at Cambrai.

The areas in the East were larger. The Germans did well at the First Masurian Lakes driving the invaders from East Prussia, and at Riga, which led the Russians to sue for peace. The Austro-Hungarians and Germans joined for a great success at Gorlice–Tarnów, which drove the Russians out of Poland. In a series of attacks along with the Bulgarians they occupied Serbia, Albania, Montenegro and most of Romania. The Allies successes came later in Palestine, the beginning of the end for the Ottomans, in Macedonia, which drove the Bulgarians out of the war, and at Vittorio Veneto, the final blow for the Austro-Hungarians. The area occupied in East by the Central powers on 11 November 1918 was 1,042,600 km2 (402,600 sq mi).

Naval 
The Moltke-class Ottoman battlecruiser Yavûz Sult'n Selîm
Germany deployed U-boats (submarines) after the war began. Alternating between restricted and unrestricted submarine warfare in the Atlantic, the Kaiserliche Marine employed them to deprive the British Isles of vital supplies. The deaths of British merchant sailors and the seeming invulnerability of U-boats led to the development of depth charges (1916), hydrophones (passive sonar, 1917), blimps, hunter-killer submarines (HMS R-1, 1917), forward-throwing anti-submarine weapons, and dipping hydrophones (the latter two both abandoned in 1918).[120] To extend their operations, the Germans proposed supply submarines (1916). Most of these would be forgotten in the interwar period until World War II revived the need.[301]

Aviation 
Main article: Aviation in World War I
RAF Sopwith Camel. In April 1917, the average life expectancy of a British pilot on the Western Front was 93 flying hours.[302]
Fixed-wing aircraft were first used militarily by the Italians in Libya on 23 October 1911 during the Italo-Turkish War for reconnaissance, soon followed by the dropping of grenades and aerial photography the next year. By 1914, their military utility was obvious. They were initially used for reconnaissance and ground attack. To shoot down enemy planes, anti-aircraft guns and fighter aircraft were developed. Strategic bombers were created, principally by the Germans and British, though the former used Zeppelins as well.[303] Towards the end of the conflict, aircraft carriers were used for the first time, with HMS Furious launching Sopwith Camels in a raid to destroy the Zeppelin hangars at Tondern in 1918.[304]

Luftstreitkräfte Fokker Dr.I being inspected by Manfred von Richthofen, also known as the Red Baron, one of most famous pilots in the war.[305]
Manned observation balloons, floating high above the trenches, were used as stationary reconnaissance platforms, reporting enemy movements and directing artillery. Balloons commonly had a crew of two, equipped with parachutes,[306] so that if there was an enemy air attack the crew could parachute to safety. At the time, parachutes were too heavy to be used by pilots of aircraft (with their marginal power output), and smaller versions were not developed until the end of the war; they were also opposed by the British leadership, who feared they might promote cowardice.[307]

Recognised for their value as observation platforms, balloons were important targets for enemy aircraft. To defend them against air attack, they were heavily protected by antiaircraft guns and patrolled by friendly aircraft; to attack them, unusual weapons such as air-to-air rockets were tried. Thus, the reconnaissance value of blimps and balloons contributed to the development of air-to-air combat between all types of aircraft, and to the trench stalemate, because it was impossible to move large numbers of troops undetected. The Germans conducted air raids on England during 1915 and 1916 with airships, hoping to damage British morale and cause aircraft to be diverted from the front lines, and indeed the resulting panic led to the diversion of several squadrons of fighters from France.[303][307]

War crimes  Baralong incidents 
Main article: Baralong incidents
HMS Baralong
On 19 August 1915, the German submarine U-27 was sunk by the British Q-ship HMS Baralong. All German survivors were summarily executed by Baralong' s crew on the orders of Lieutenant Godfrey Herbert, the captain of the ship. The shooting was reported to the media by American citizens who were on board the Nicosia, a British freighter loaded with war supplies, which was stopped by U-27 just minutes before the incident.[308]

On 24 September, Baralong destroyed U-41, which was in the process of sinking the cargo ship Urbino. According to Karl Goetz, the submarine's commander, Baralong continued to fly the US flag after firing on U-41 and then rammed the lifeboat—carrying the German survivors—sinking it.[309]

Torpedoing of HMHS Llandovery Castle 
See also: Unrestricted submarine warfare
The Canadian hospital ship HMHS Llandovery Castle was torpedoed by the German submarine SM U-86 on 27 June 1918 in violation of international law. Only 24 of the 258 medical personnel, patients, and crew survived. Survivors reported that the U-boat surfaced and ran down the lifeboats, machine-gunning survivors in the water. The U-boat captain, Helmut Patzig, was charged with war crimes in Germany following the war, but escaped prosecution by going to the Free City of Danzig, beyond the jurisdiction of German courts.[310]

Blockade of Germany 
See also: Blockade of Germany
After the war, the German government claimed that approximately 763,000 German civilians died from starvation and disease during the war because of the Allied blockade.[311][312] Germany protested that the Allies had used starvation as a weapon of war.[313] According to the British judge and legal philosopher Patrick Devlin, "The War Orders given by the Admiralty on 26 August [1914] were clear enough. All food consigned to Germany through neutral ports was to be captured and all food consigned to Rotterdam was to be presumed consigned to Germany. ... The British were determined on the starvation policy, whether or not it was lawful."[314]

Chemical weapons in warfare 
Main article: Chemical weapons in World War I
French soldiers making a gas and flame attack on German trenches in Flanders
The first successful use of poison gas as a weapon of warfare occurred during the Second Battle of Ypres (22 April – 25 May 1915).[315] Gas was soon used by all major belligerents throughout the war. It is estimated that the use of chemical weapons employed by both sides throughout the war had inflicted 1.3 million casualties. For example, the British had over 180,000 chemical weapons casualties during the war, and up to one-third of American casualties were caused by them. The Russian Army reportedly suffered roughly 500,000 chemical weapon casualties in World War I.[316] The use of chemical weapons in warfare was in direct violation of the 1899 Hague Declaration Concerning Asphyxiating Gases and the 1907 Hague Convention on Land Warfare, which prohibited their use.[317][318]

The effect of poison gas was not limited to combatants. Civilians were at risk from the gases as winds blew the poison gases through their towns, and they rarely received warnings or alerts of potential danger. In addition to absent warning systems, civilians often did not have access to effective gas masks. An estimated 100,000–260,000 civilian casualties were caused by chemical weapons during the conflict and tens of thousands more (along with military personnel) died from scarring of the lungs, skin damage, and cerebral damage in the years after the conflict ended. Many commanders on both sides knew such weapons would cause major harm to civilians but nonetheless continued to use them. British Field Marshal Sir Douglas Haig wrote in his diary, "My officers and I were aware that such weapons would cause harm to women and children living in nearby towns, as strong winds were common in the battlefront. However, because the weapon was to be directed against the enemy, none of us were overly concerned at all."[319][320][321][322]

Genocide and ethnic cleansing  Ottoman Empire 
See also: Armenian Genocide, Assyrian genocide, Greek genocide, and Genocide denial
Armenians killed during the Armenian Genocide. Image taken from Ambassador Morgenthau's Story, written by Henry Morgenthau, Sr. and published in 1918.[323]
Austro-Hungarian soldiers executing men and women in Serbia, 1916[324]
The ethnic cleansing of the Ottoman Empire's Armenian population, including mass deportations and executions, during the final years of the Ottoman Empire is considered genocide.[325] The Ottomans carried out organised and systematic massacres of the Armenian population at the beginning of the war and portrayed deliberately provoked acts of Armenian resistance as rebellions to justify further extermination.[326] In early 1915, a number of Armenians volunteered to join the Russian forces and the Ottoman government used this as a pretext to issue the Tehcir Law (Law on Deportation), which authorised the deportation of Armenians from the Empire's eastern provinces to Syria between 1915 and 1918. The Armenians were intentionally marched to death and a number were attacked by Ottoman brigands.[327] While an exact number of deaths is unknown, the International Association of Genocide Scholars estimates 1.5 million.[325][328] The government of Turkey has consistently denied the genocide, arguing that those who died were victims of inter-ethnic fighting, famine, or disease during World War I; these claims are rejected by most historians.[329]

Other ethnic groups were similarly attacked by the Ottoman Empire during this period, including Assyrians and Greeks, and some scholars consider those events to be part of the same policy of extermination.[330][331][332] At least 250,000 Assyrian Christians, about half of the population, and 350,000–750,000 Anatolian and Pontic Greeks were killed between 1915 and 1922.[333]

Russian Empire 
Main article: Anti-Jewish pogroms in the Russian Empire
See also: Urkun
Many pogroms accompanied the Russian Revolution of 1917 and the ensuing Russian Civil War. 60,000–200,000 civilian Jews were killed in the atrocities throughout the former Russian Empire (mostly within the Pale of Settlement in present-day Ukraine).[334] There were an estimated 7–12 million casualties during the Russian Civil War, mostly civilians.[335]

Rape of Belgium 
Main article: Rape of Belgium
The German invaders treated any resistance—such as sabotaging rail lines—as illegal and immoral, and shot the offenders and burned buildings in retaliation. In addition, they tended to suspect that most civilians were potential francs-tireurs (guerrillas) and, accordingly, took and sometimes killed hostages from among the civilian population. The German army executed over 6,500 French and Belgian civilians between August and November 1914, usually in near-random large-scale shootings of civilians ordered by junior German officers. The German Army destroyed 15,000–20,000 buildings—most famously the university library at Louvain—and generated a wave of refugees of over a million people. Over half the German regiments in Belgium were involved in major incidents.[336] Thousands of workers were shipped to Germany to work in factories. British propaganda dramatising the Rape of Belgium attracted much attention in the United States, while Berlin said it was both lawful and necessary because of the threat of franc-tireurs like those in France in 1870.[337] The British and French magnified the reports and disseminated them at home and in the United States, where they played a major role in dissolving support for Germany.[338][339]

 Soldiers' experiences 
Main articles: List of last surviving World War I veterans by country, World War I casualties, Commonwealth War Graves Commission, and American Battle Monuments Commission
The First Contingent of the Bermuda Volunteer Rifle Corps to the 1 Lincolns, training in Bermuda for the Western Front, winter 1914–1915. The two BVRC contingents suffered 75% casualties.
The British soldiers of the war were initially volunteers but increasingly were conscripted into service. Surviving veterans, returning home, often found they could discuss their experiences only amongst themselves. Grouping together, they formed "veterans' associations" or "Legions". A small number of personal accounts of American veterans have been collected by the Library of Congress Veterans History Project.[340]

Prisoners of war 
Main article: World War I prisoners of war in Germany
German prisoners in a French prison camp during the later part of the war
About eight million men surrendered and were held in POW camps during the war. All nations pledged to follow the Hague Conventions on fair treatment of prisoners of war, and the survival rate for POWs was generally much higher than that of combatants at the front.[341] Individual surrenders were uncommon; large units usually surrendered en masse. At the siege of Maubeuge about 40,000 French soldiers surrendered, at the battle of Galicia Russians took about 100,000 to 120,000 Austrian captives, at the Brusilov Offensive about 325,000 to 417,000 Germans and Austrians surrendered to Russians, and at the Battle of Tannenberg 92,000 Russians surrendered. When the besieged garrison of Kaunas surrendered in 1915, some 20,000 Russians became prisoners, at the battle near Przasnysz (February–March 1915) 14,000 Germans surrendered to Russians, and at the First Battle of the Marne about 12,000 Germans surrendered to the Allies. 25–31% of Russian losses (as a proportion of those captured, wounded, or killed) were to prisoner status; for Austria-Hungary 32%, for Italy 26%, for France 12%, for Germany 9%; for Britain 7%. Prisoners from the Allied armies totalled about 1.4 million (not including Russia, which lost 2.5–3.5 million men as prisoners). From the Central Powers about 3.3 million men became prisoners; most of them surrendered to Russians.[342] Germany held 2.5 million prisoners; Russia held 2.2–2.9 million; while Britain and France held about 720,000. Most were captured just before the Armistice. The United States held 48,000. The most dangerous moment was the act of surrender, when helpless soldiers were sometimes gunned down.[343][344] Once prisoners reached a camp, conditions were, in general, satisfactory (and much better than in World War II), thanks in part to the efforts of the International Red Cross and inspections by neutral nations. However, conditions were terrible in Russia: starvation was common for prisoners and civilians alike; about 15–20% of the prisoners in Russia died, and in Central Powers imprisonment 8% of Russians.[345] In Germany, food was scarce, but only 5% died.[346][347][348]

British prisoners guarded by Ottoman forces after the First Battle of Gaza in 1917
The Ottoman Empire often treated POWs poorly.[349] Some 11,800 British Empire soldiers, most of them Indians, became prisoners after the Siege of Kut in Mesopotamia in April 1916; 4,250 died in captivity.[350] Although many were in a poor condition when captured, Ottoman officers forced them to march 1,100 kilometres (684 mi) to Anatolia. A survivor said: "We were driven along like beasts; to drop out was to die."[351] The survivors were then forced to build a railway through the Taurus Mountains.

In Russia, when the prisoners from the Czech Legion of the Austro-Hungarian army were released in 1917, they re-armed themselves and briefly became a military and diplomatic force during the Russian Civil War.

While the Allied prisoners of the Central Powers were quickly sent home at the end of active hostilities, the same treatment was not granted to Central Power prisoners of the Allies and Russia, many of whom served as forced labour, e.g., in France until 1920. They were released only after many approaches by the Red Cross to the Allied Supreme Council.[352] German prisoners were still being held in Russia as late as 1924.[353]

 Military attachés and war correspondents 
Main article: Military attachés and war correspondents in the First World War
Military and civilian observers from every major power closely followed the course of the war. Many were able to report on events from a perspective somewhat akin to modern "embedded" positions within the opposing land and naval forces.

Support for the war 
Poster urging women to join the British war effort, published by the Young Women's Christian Association
In the Balkans, Yugoslav nationalists such as the leader, Ante Trumbić, strongly supported the war, desiring the freedom of Yugoslavs from Austria-Hungary and other foreign powers and the creation of an independent Yugoslavia. The Yugoslav Committee, led by Trumbić, was formed in Paris on 30 April 1915 but shortly moved its office to London.[354] In April 1918, the Rome Congress of Oppressed Nationalities met, including Czechoslovak, Italian, Polish, Transylvanian, and Yugoslav representatives who urged the Allies to support national self-determination for the peoples residing within Austria-Hungary.[355]

In the Middle East, Arab nationalism soared in Ottoman territories in response to the rise of Turkish nationalism during the war, with Arab nationalist leaders advocating the creation of a pan-Arab state. In 1916, the Arab Revolt began in Ottoman-controlled territories of the Middle East in an effort to achieve independence.[356]

In East Africa, Iyasu V of Ethiopia was supporting the Dervish state who were at war with the British in the Somaliland Campaign.[357] Von Syburg, the German envoy in Addis Ababa, said, "now the time has come for Ethiopia to regain the coast of the Red Sea driving the Italians home, to restore the Empire to its ancient size." The Ethiopian Empire was on the verge of entering World War I on the side of the Central Powers before Iyasu's overthrow due to Allied pressure on the Ethiopian aristocracy.[358] Iyasu was accused of converting to Islam.[359] According to Ethiopian historian Bahru Zewde, the evidence used to prove Iyasu's conversion was a doctored photo of Iyasu wearing a turban provided by the Allies.[360] Some historians claim the British spy T. E. Lawrence forged the Iyasu photo.[361]

A number of socialist parties initially supported the war when it began in August 1914.[355] But European socialists split on national lines, with the concept of class conflict held by radical socialists such as Marxists and syndicalists being overborne by their patriotic support for the war.[362] Once the war began, Austrian, British, French, German, and Russian socialists followed the rising nationalist current by supporting their countries' intervention in the war.[363]

Italian nationalism was stirred by the outbreak of the war and was initially strongly supported by a variety of political factions. One of the most prominent and popular Italian nationalist supporters of the war was Gabriele d'Annunzio, who promoted Italian irredentism and helped sway the Italian public to support intervention in the war.[364] The Italian Liberal Party, under the leadership of Paolo Boselli, promoted intervention in the war on the side of the Allies and used the Dante Alighieri Society to promote Italian nationalism.[365] Italian socialists were divided on whether to support the war or oppose it; some were militant supporters of the war, including Benito Mussolini and Leonida Bissolati.[366] However, the Italian Socialist Party decided to oppose the war after anti-militarist protestors were killed, resulting in a general strike called Red Week.[367] The Italian Socialist Party purged itself of pro-war nationalist members, including Mussolini.[367] Mussolini, a syndicalist who supported the war on grounds of irredentist claims on Italian-populated regions of Austria-Hungary, formed the pro-interventionist Il Popolo d'Italia and the Fasci Rivoluzionario d'Azione Internazionalista ("Revolutionary Fasci for International Action") in October 1914 that later developed into the Fasci di Combattimento in 1919, the origin of fascism.[368] Mussolini's nationalism enabled him to raise funds from Ansaldo (an armaments firm) and other companies to create Il Popolo d'Italia to convince socialists and revolutionaries to support the war.[369]

Opposition to the war 
Main articles: Opposition to World War I and French Army Mutinies
Sackville Street (now O'Connell Street) after the 1916 Easter Rising in Dublin
Once war was declared, many socialists and trade unions backed their governments. Among the exceptions were the Bolsheviks, the Socialist Party of America, the Italian Socialist Party, and people like Karl Liebknecht, Rosa Luxemburg, and their followers in Germany.

Benedict XV, elected to the papacy less than three months into World War I, made the war and its consequences the main focus of his early pontificate. In stark contrast to his predecessor,[370] five days after his election he spoke of his determination to do what he could to bring peace. His first encyclical, Ad beatissimi Apostolorum, given 1 November 1914, was concerned with this subject. Benedict XV found his abilities and unique position as a religious emissary of peace ignored by the belligerent powers. The 1915 Treaty of London between Italy and the Triple Entente included secret provisions whereby the Allies agreed with Italy to ignore papal peace moves towards the Central Powers. Consequently, the publication of Benedict's proposed seven-point Peace Note of August 1917 was roundly ignored by all parties except Austria-Hungary.[371]

The Deserter, 1916: Anti-war cartoon depicting Jesus facing a firing squad with soldiers from five European countries
In Britain in 1914, the Public Schools Officers' Training Corps annual camp was held at Tidworth Pennings, near Salisbury Plain. Head of the British Army, Lord Kitchener, was to review the cadets, but the imminence of the war prevented him. General Horace Smith-Dorrien was sent instead. He surprised the two-or-three thousand cadets by declaring (in the words of Donald Christopher Smith, a Bermudian cadet who was present),

that war should be avoided at almost any cost, that war would solve nothing, that the whole of Europe and more besides would be reduced to ruin, and that the loss of life would be so large that whole populations would be decimated. In our ignorance I, and many of us, felt almost ashamed of a British General who uttered such depressing and unpatriotic sentiments, but during the next four years, those of us who survived the holocaust—probably not more than one-quarter of us—learned how right the General's prognosis was and how courageous he had been to utter it.[372]

Voicing these sentiments did not hinder Smith-Dorrien's career, or prevent him from doing his duty in World War I to the best of his abilities.

Possible execution at Verdun at the time of the mutinies in 1917. The original French text accompanying this photograph notes, however, that the uniforms are those of 1914/15 and that the execution may be that of a spy at the beginning of the war.
Many countries jailed those who spoke out against the conflict. These included Eugene Debs in the United States and Bertrand Russell in Britain. In the US, the Espionage Act of 1917 and Sedition Act of 1918 made it a federal crime to oppose military recruitment or make any statements deemed "disloyal". Publications at all critical of the government were removed from circulation by postal censors,[188] and many served long prison sentences for statements of fact deemed unpatriotic.

A number of nationalists opposed intervention, particularly within states that the nationalists were hostile to. Although the vast majority of Irish people consented to participate in the war in 1914 and 1915, a minority of advanced Irish nationalists staunchly opposed taking part.[373] The war began amid the Home Rule crisis in Ireland that had resurfaced in 1912, and by July 1914 there was a serious possibility of an outbreak of civil war in Ireland. Irish nationalists and Marxists attempted to pursue Irish independence, culminating in the Easter Rising of 1916, with Germany sending 20,000 rifles to Ireland to stir unrest in Britain.[374] The UK government placed Ireland under martial law in response to the Easter Rising, though once the immediate threat of revolution had dissipated, the authorities did try to make concessions to nationalist feeling.[375] However, opposition to involvement in the war increased in Ireland, resulting in the Conscription Crisis of 1918.

Other opposition came from conscientious objectors—some socialist, some religious—who refused to fight. In Britain, 16,000 people asked for conscientious objector status.[376] Some of them, most notably prominent peace activist Stephen Henry Hobhouse, refused both military and alternative service.[377] Many suffered years of prison, including solitary confinement and bread and water diets. Even after the war, in Britain many job advertisements were marked "No conscientious objectors need apply".[This quote needs a citation ]

Bolshevik leaders Lenin and Trotsky promised “Peace, Land and Bread” to the masses.
The Central Asian Revolt started in the summer of 1916, when the Russian Empire government ended its exemption of Muslims from military service.[378]

In 1917, a series of French Army Mutinies led to dozens of soldiers being executed and many more imprisoned.

On 1–4 May 1917, about 100,000 workers and soldiers of Petrograd, and after them, the workers and soldiers of other Russian cities, led by the Bolsheviks, demonstrated under banners reading "Down with the war!" and "all power to the soviets!" The mass demonstrations resulted in a crisis for the Russian Provisional Government.[379] In Milan, in May 1917, Bolshevik revolutionaries organised and engaged in rioting calling for an end to the war, and managed to close down factories and stop public transportation.[380] The Italian army was forced to enter Milan with tanks and machine guns to face Bolsheviks and anarchists, who fought violently until 23 May when the army gained control of the city. Almost 50 people (including three Italian soldiers) were killed and over 800 people arrested.[380]

In September 1917, Russian soldiers in France began questioning why they were fighting for the French at all and mutinied.[381] In Russia, opposition to the war led to soldiers also establishing their own revolutionary committees, which helped foment the October Revolution of 1917, with the call going up for "bread, land, and peace". The Decree on Peace, written by Vladimir Lenin, was passed on 8 November 1917, following the success of the October Revolution.[382] The Bolsheviks agreed to a peace treaty with Germany, the peace of Brest-Litovsk, despite its harsh conditions. The German Revolution of 1918-1919 led to the abdication of the Kaiser and German surrender.

Conscription 
Young men registering for conscription, New York City, 5 June 1917
Conscription was common in most European countries. However, it was controversial in English-speaking countries. It was especially unpopular among minority ethnic groups—especially the Irish Catholics in Ireland[383] and Australia, and the French Catholics in Canada.

Canada 
Main article: Conscription Crisis of 1917
In Canada the issue produced a major political crisis that permanently alienated the Francophones. It opened a political gap between French Canadians, who believed their true loyalty was to Canada and not to the British Empire, and members of the Anglophone majority, who saw the war as a duty to their British heritage.[384]

Australia 
Main article: Conscription in Australia
Military recruitment in Melbourne, Australia, 1914
Australia had a form of conscription at the outbreak of the war, as compulsory military training had been introduced in 1911. However, the Defence Act 1903 provided that unexempted males could only be called upon for home defence during times of war, not overseas service. Prime Minister Billy Hughes wished to amend the legislation to require conscripts to serve overseas, and held two non-binding referendums – one in 1916 and one in 1917 – in order to secure public support.[385] Both were defeated by narrow margins, with farmers, the labour movement, the Catholic Church, and Irish-Australians combining to campaign for the "No" vote.[386] The issue of conscription caused the 1916 Australian Labor Party split. Hughes and his supporters were expelled from the party, forming the National Labor Party and then the Nationalist Party. Despite the referendum results, the Nationalists won a landslide victory at the 1917 federal election.[385]

Britain 
Main article: Conscription in the United Kingdom
See also: Recruitment to the British Army during the First World War
British volunteer recruits in London, August 1914
In Britain, conscription resulted in the calling up of nearly every physically fit man in Britain—six of ten million eligible. Of these, about 750,000 lost their lives. Most deaths were those of young unmarried men; however, 160,000 wives lost husbands and 300,000 children lost fathers.[387] Conscription during the First World War began when the British government passed the Military Service Act in 1916. The act specified that single men aged 18 to 40 years old were liable to be called up for military service unless they were widowed with children or ministers of a religion. There was a system of Military Service Tribunals to adjudicate upon claims for exemption upon the grounds of performing civilian work of national importance, domestic hardship, health, and conscientious objection. The law went through several changes before the war ended. Married men were exempt in the original Act, although this was changed in June 1916. The age limit was also eventually raised to 51 years old. Recognition of work of national importance also diminished, and in the last year of the war there was some support for the conscription of clergy.[388] Conscription lasted until mid-1919. Due to the political situation in Ireland, conscription was never applied there; only in England, Scotland and Wales.

United States 
Main article: Conscription in the United States § World War I
In the United States, conscription began in 1917 and was generally well received, with a few pockets of opposition in isolated rural areas.[389] The administration decided to rely primarily on conscription, rather than voluntary enlistment, to raise military manpower for when only 73,000 volunteers enlisted out of the initial 1 million target in the first six weeks of the war.[390] In 1917 10 million men were registered. This was deemed to be inadequate, so age ranges were increased and exemptions reduced, and so by the end of 1918 this increased to 24 million men that were registered with nearly 3 million inducted into the military services. The draft was universal and included blacks on the same terms as whites, although they served in different units. In all 367,710 black Americans were drafted (13% of the total), compared to 2,442,586 white (87%).

Forms of resistance ranged from peaceful protest to violent demonstrations and from humble letter-writing campaigns asking for mercy to radical newspapers demanding reform. The most common tactics were dodging and desertion, and many communities sheltered and defended their draft dodgers as political heroes. Many socialists were jailed for "obstructing the recruitment or enlistment service". The most famous was Eugene Debs, head of the Socialist Party of America, who ran for president in 1920 from his prison cell. In 1917 a number of radicals and anarchists challenged the new draft law in federal court, arguing that it was a direct violation of the Thirteenth Amendment's prohibition against slavery and involuntary servitude. The Supreme Court unanimously upheld the constitutionality of the draft act in the Selective Draft Law Cases on 7 January 1918.

Austria-Hungary 
Like all of the armies of mainland Europe, Austria-Hungary relied on conscription to fill its ranks. Officer recruitment, however, was voluntary. The effect of this at the start of the war was that well over a quarter of the rank and file were Slavs, while more than 75% of the officers were ethnic Germans. This was much resented. The army has been described as being "run on colonial lines" and the Slav soldiers as "disaffected". Thus conscription contributed greatly to Austria's disastrous performance on the battlefield.[391]

Diplomacy 
Main article: Diplomatic history of World War I
The non-military diplomatic and propaganda interactions among the nations were designed to build support for the cause, or to undermine support for the enemy. For the most part, wartime diplomacy focused on five issues: propaganda campaigns; defining and redefining the war goals, which became harsher as the war went on; luring neutral nations (Italy, Ottoman Empire, Bulgaria, Romania) into the coalition by offering slices of enemy territory; and encouragement by the Allies of nationalistic minority movements inside the Central Powers, especially among Czechs, Poles, and Arabs. In addition, there were multiple peace proposals coming from neutrals, or one side or the other; none of them progressed very far.[392][393][394]

Legacy and memory 
... "Strange, friend," I said, "Here is no cause to mourn."
"None," said the other, "Save the undone years"... 

— Wilfred Owen, Strange Meeting, 1918[296]
The War was an unprecedented triumph for natural science. [Francis] Bacon had promised that knowledge would be power, and power it was: power to destroy the bodies and souls of men more rapidly than had ever been done by human agency before. This triumph paved the way to other triumphs: improvements in transport, in sanitation, in surgery, medicine, and psychiatry, in commerce and industry, and, above all, in preparations for the next war.

— R.G. Collingwood, writing in 1939.[395]
The first tentative efforts to comprehend the meaning and consequences of modern warfare began during the initial phases of the war, and this process continued throughout and after the end of hostilities, and is still underway, more than a century later.

Historiography 
Historian Heather Jones argues that the historiography has been reinvigorated by the cultural turn in recent years. Scholars have raised entirely new questions regarding military occupation, radicalisation of politics, race, and the male body. Furthermore, new research has revised our understanding of five major topics that historians have long debated: Why the war began, why the Allies won, whether generals were responsible for high casualty rates, how the soldiers endured the horrors of trench warfare, and to what extent the civilian homefront accepted and endorsed the war effort.[396]

Memorials 
Main article: World War I memorials
A typical village war memorial to soldiers killed in World War I
Memorials were erected in thousands of villages and towns. Close to battlefields, those buried in improvised burial grounds were gradually moved to formal graveyards under the care of organisations such as the Commonwealth War Graves Commission, the American Battle Monuments Commission, the German War Graves Commission, and Le Souvenir français. Many of these graveyards also have central monuments to the missing or unidentified dead, such as the Menin Gate memorial and the Thiepval Memorial to the Missing of the Somme.

In 1915 John McCrae, a Canadian army doctor, wrote the poem In Flanders Fields as a salute to those who perished in the Great War. Published in Punch on 8 December 1915, it is still recited today, especially on Remembrance Day and Memorial Day.[397][398]

National World War I Museum and Memorial in Kansas City, Missouri, is a memorial dedicated to all Americans who served in World War I. The Liberty Memorial was dedicated on 1 November 1921, when the supreme Allied commanders spoke to a crowd of more than 100,000 people.[399]

The UK Government has budgeted substantial resources to the commemoration of the war during the period 2014 to 2018. The lead body is the Imperial War Museum.[400] On 3 August 2014, French President Francois Hollande and German President Joachim Gauck together marked the centenary of Germany's declaration of war on France by laying the first stone of a memorial in Vieil Armand, known in German as Hartmannswillerkopf, for French and German soldiers killed in the war.[401]

Cultural memory 
Further information: World War I in popular culture
[Image: Globe icon.]  
The examples and perspective in this section deal primarily with Britain and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this section, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new article, as appropriate.  (June 2017 ) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Left: John McCrae, author of In Flanders Fields
Right: Siegfried Sassoon
World War I had a lasting impact on social memory. It was seen by many in Britain as signalling the end of an era of stability stretching back to the Victorian period, and across Europe many regarded it as a watershed.[402] Historian Samuel Hynes explained:

A generation of innocent young men, their heads full of high abstractions like Honour, Glory and England, went off to war to make the world safe for democracy. They were slaughtered in stupid battles planned by stupid generals. Those who survived were shocked, disillusioned and embittered by their war experiences, and saw that their real enemies were not the Germans, but the old men at home who had lied to them. They rejected the values of the society that had sent them to war, and in doing so separated their own generation from the past and from their cultural inheritance.[403]

This has become the most common perception of World War I, perpetuated by the art, cinema, poems, and stories published subsequently. Films such as All Quiet on the Western Front, Paths of Glory and King & Country have perpetuated the idea, while war-time films including Camrades, Poppies of Flanders, and Shoulder Arms indicate that the most contemporary views of the war were overall far more positive.[404] Likewise, the art of Paul Nash, John Nash, Christopher Nevinson, and Henry Tonks in Britain painted a negative view of the conflict in keeping with the growing perception, while popular war-time artists such as Muirhead Bone painted more serene and pleasant interpretations subsequently rejected as inaccurate.[403] Several historians like John Terraine, Niall Ferguson and Gary Sheffield have challenged these interpretations as partial and polemical views:

These beliefs did not become widely shared because they offered the only accurate interpretation of wartime events. In every respect, the war was much more complicated than they suggest. In recent years, historians have argued persuasively against almost every popular cliché of World War I. It has been pointed out that, although the losses were devastating, their greatest impact was socially and geographically limited. The many emotions other than horror experienced by soldiers in and out of the front line, including comradeship, boredom, and even enjoyment, have been recognised. The war is not now seen as a 'fight about nothing', but as a war of ideals, a struggle between aggressive militarism and more or less liberal democracy. It has been acknowledged that British generals were often capable men facing difficult challenges, and that it was under their command that the British army played a major part in the defeat of the Germans in 1918: a great forgotten victory.[404]

Though these views have been discounted as "myths",[403][405] they are common. They have dynamically changed according to contemporary influences, reflecting in the 1950s perceptions of the war as "aimless" following the contrasting Second World War and emphasising conflict within the ranks during times of class conflict in the 1960s. The majority of additions to the contrary are often rejected.[404]

Social trauma 
A 1919 book for veterans, from the US War Department
The social trauma caused by unprecedented rates of casualties manifested itself in different ways, which have been the subject of subsequent historical debate.[406]

The optimism of la belle époque was destroyed, and those who had fought in the war were referred to as the Lost Generation.[407] For years afterwards, people mourned the dead, the missing, and the many disabled.[408] Many soldiers returned with severe trauma, suffering from shell shock (also called neurasthenia, a condition related to posttraumatic stress disorder).[409] Many more returned home with few after-effects; however, their silence about the war contributed to the conflict's growing mythological status. Though many participants did not share in the experiences of combat or spend any significant time at the front, or had positive memories of their service, the images of suffering and trauma became the widely shared perception. Such historians as Dan Todman, Paul Fussell, and Samuel Heyns have all published works since the 1990s arguing that these common perceptions of the war are factually incorrect.[406]

Discontent in Germany 
The rise of Nazism and Fascism included a revival of the nationalist spirit and a rejection of many post-war changes. Similarly, the popularity of the stab-in-the-back legend (German: Dolchstoßlegende) was a testament to the psychological state of defeated Germany and was a rejection of responsibility for the conflict. This conspiracy theory of betrayal became common, and the German populace came to see themselves as victims. The widespread acceptance of the "stab-in-the-back" theory delegitimised the Weimar government and destabilised the system, opening it to extremes of right and left.

Communist and fascist movements around Europe drew strength from this theory and enjoyed a new level of popularity. These feelings were most pronounced in areas directly or harshly affected by the war. Adolf Hitler was able to gain popularity by using German discontent with the still controversial Treaty of Versailles.[410] World War II was in part a continuation of the power struggle never fully resolved by World War I. Furthermore, it was common for Germans in the 1930s to justify acts of aggression due to perceived injustices imposed by the victors of World War I.[411][412][413] American historian William Rubinstein wrote that:

The 'Age of Totalitarianism' included nearly all of the infamous examples of genocide in modern history, headed by the Jewish Holocaust, but also comprising the mass murders and purges of the Communist world, other mass killings carried out by Nazi Germany and its allies, and also the Armenian Genocide of 1915. All these slaughters, it is argued here, had a common origin, the collapse of the elite structure and normal modes of government of much of central, eastern and southern Europe as a result of World War I, without which surely neither Communism nor Fascism would have existed except in the minds of unknown agitators and crackpots.[414]

Economic effects 
See also: Economic history of World War I
Poster showing women workers, 1915
One of the most dramatic effects of the war was the expansion of governmental powers and responsibilities in Britain, France, the United States, and the Dominions of the British Empire. To harness all the power of their societies, governments created new ministries and powers. New taxes were levied and laws enacted, all designed to bolster the war effort; many have lasted to this day. Similarly, the war strained the abilities of some formerly large and bureaucratised governments, such as in Austria-Hungary and Germany.

Gross domestic product (GDP) increased for three Allies (Britain, Italy, and the United States), but decreased in France and Russia, in neutral Netherlands, and in the three main Central Powers. The shrinkage in GDP in Austria, Russia, France, and the Ottoman Empire ranged between 30% and 40%. In Austria, for example, most pigs were slaughtered, so at war's end there was no meat.

In all nations, the government's share of GDP increased, surpassing 50% in both Germany and France and nearly reaching that level in Britain. To pay for purchases in the United States, Britain cashed in its extensive investments in American railroads and then began borrowing heavily from Wall Street. President Wilson was on the verge of cutting off the loans in late 1916, but allowed a great increase in US government lending to the Allies. After 1919, the US demanded repayment of these loans. The repayments were, in part, funded by German reparations that, in turn, were supported by American loans to Germany. This circular system collapsed in 1931 and some loans were never repaid. Britain still owed the United States $4.4 billion[415] of World War I debt in 1934, the last instalment was finally paid in 2015.[416]

Macro- and micro-economic consequences devolved from the war. Families were altered by the departure of many men. With the death or absence of the primary wage earner, women were forced into the workforce in unprecedented numbers. At the same time, industry needed to replace the lost labourers sent to war. This aided the struggle for voting rights for women.[417]

World War I further compounded the gender imbalance, adding to the phenomenon of surplus women. The deaths of nearly one million men during the war in Britain increased the gender gap by almost a million: from 670,000 to 1,700,000. The number of unmarried women seeking economic means grew dramatically. In addition, demobilisation and economic decline following the war caused high unemployment. The war increased female employment; however, the return of demobilised men displaced many from the workforce, as did the closure of many of the wartime factories.

In Britain, rationing was finally imposed in early 1918, limited to meat, sugar, and fats (butter and margarine), but not bread. The new system worked smoothly. From 1914 to 1918, trade union membership doubled, from a little over four million to a little over eight million.

Britain turned to her colonies for help in obtaining essential war materials whose supply from traditional sources had become difficult. Geologists such as Albert Ernest Kitson were called on to find new resources of precious minerals in the African colonies. Kitson discovered important new deposits of manganese, used in munitions production, in the Gold Coast.[418]

Article 231 of the Treaty of Versailles (the so-called "war guilt" clause) stated Germany accepted responsibility for "all the loss and damage to which the Allied and Associated Governments and their nationals have been subjected as a consequence of the war imposed upon them by the aggression of Germany and her allies."[419] It was worded as such to lay a legal basis for reparations, and a similar clause was inserted in the treaties with Austria and Hungary. However neither of them interpreted it as an admission of war guilt."[420] In 1921, the total reparation sum was placed at 132 billion gold marks. However, "Allied experts knew that Germany could not pay" this sum. The total sum was divided into three categories, with the third being "deliberately designed to be chimerical" and its "primary function was to mislead public opinion ... into believing the "total sum was being maintained."[421] Thus, 50 billion gold marks (12.5 billion dollars) "represented the actual Allied assessment of German capacity to pay" and "therefore ... represented the total German reparations" figure that had to be paid.[421]

This figure could be paid in cash or in kind (coal, timber, chemical dyes, etc.). In addition, some of the territory lost—via the treaty of Versailles—was credited towards the reparation figure as were other acts such as helping to restore the Library of Louvain.[422] By 1929, the Great Depression arrived, causing political chaos throughout the world.[423] In 1932 the payment of reparations was suspended by the international community, by which point Germany had only paid the equivalent of 20.598 billion gold marks in reparations.[424] With the rise of Adolf Hitler, all bonds and loans that had been issued and taken out during the 1920s and early 1930s were cancelled. David Andelman notes "refusing to pay doesn't make an agreement null and void. The bonds, the agreement, still exist." Thus, following the Second World War, at the London Conference in 1953, Germany agreed to resume payment on the money borrowed. On 3 October 2010, Germany made the final payment on these bonds.[i]

The war contributed to the evolution of the wristwatch from women's jewellery to a practical everyday item, replacing the pocketwatch, which requires a free hand to operate.[429] Military funding of advancements in radio contributed to the postwar popularity of the medium.[429]

See also 

    [Image: icon]   World War I portal 
     War portal 

    Lists of World War I topics
    Outline of World War I

Footnotes 

    ^  The United States did not ratify any of the treaties agreed to at the Paris Peace Conference. 
    ^  Bulgaria joined the Central Powers on 14 October 1915. 
    ^  The Ottoman Empire agreed to a secret alliance with Germany on 2 August 1914. It joined the war on the side of the Central Powers on 29 October 1914. 
    ^  The United States declared war on Austria-Hungary on 7 December 1917. 
    ^  Austria was considered one of the successor states to Austria-Hungary. 
    ^  The United States declared war on Germany on 6 April 1917. 
    ^  Hungary was considered one of the successor states to Austria-Hungary. 
    ^  Although the Treaty of Sèvres was intended to end the war between the Allied Powers and the Ottoman Empire, the Allied Powers and the Republic of Turkey, the successor state of the Ottoman Empire, agreed to the Treaty of Lausanne. 
    ^  World War I officially ended when Germany paid off the final amount of reparations imposed on it by the Allies.[425][426][427][428] 

References 

    ^ a b  Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 273 
    ^  "British Army statistics of the Great War". Retrieved 13 December  2011 .  
    ^  Figures are for the British Empire 
    ^  Figures are for Metropolitan France and its colonies 
    ^ a b  [1] 
    ^  Nash (1976). Darkest Hours. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-1590775264.  
    ^  "The war to end all wars". BBC News. 10 November 1998.  
    ^  Keegan 1998, p. 8. 
    ^  Bade & Brown 2003, pp. 167–168. 
    ^  Willmott 2003, p. 307. 
    ^  Williams, Rachel (2014). Dual Threat: The Spanish Influenza and World War I. University of Tennessee Thesis: Trace: Tennessee Research and Creative Exchange. pp. 4–10. Retrieved 10 September  2018 .  
    ^ a b  Taylor 1998, pp. 80–93 
    ^  Djokić 2003, p. 24. 
    ^ a b  Charles Seymour (1916). The Diplomatic Background of the War. Yale University Press. pp. 35, 147.  
    ^  Lieven, Dominic (2016). Towards the Flame: Empire, War and the End of Tsarist Russia. Penguin. p. 326. ISBN 978-0141399744.  
    ^ a b  Martel, Gordon (2014). The Month that Changed the World: July 1914 and WWI (Kindle ed.). 6286: OUP.  
    ^  "Le Président de la République, R. [Raymond] Poincaré et al., 'A La Nation Française' " (PDF) . Journal Officiel de la République Française: 7053–7054. 2 August 1914. Retrieved 26 August  2018 .  
    ^  Zuber, Terence (2011). Inventing the Schlieffen Plan: German War Planning 1871–1914 (2014 ed.). OUP. pp. 46–49. ISBN 978-0198718055.  
    ^  Note Given 2 August 1914, at 19 hours, by M. de Below Saleske [Klaus von Below-Saleske], Minister of Germany, to M. Davignon, Minister of Foreign Affairs] (1914). Documents Diplomatiques 1914: La Guerre Européenne Diplomatic Documents 1914: The European War (PDF) . Ministère des Affaires Étrangères (Ministry of Foreign Affairs). p. 201. Retrieved 26 August  2018 . CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link)  
    ^  Evans 2004, p. 12. 
    ^  Martel 2003, pp. xii ff. 
    ^  Edward M. Coffman, The War to End All Wars: The American Military Experience in World War I (1998) 
    ^  Sheffield, Gary (2002). Forgotten Victory. Review. p. 251. ISBN 978-0747271574.  
    ^ a b c  "1918 Timeline". League of Nations Photo Archive. Retrieved 20 November  2009 .  
    ^  Gerwath, Robert (2016). The Vanquished: Why the First World War Failed to End, 1917–1923 (Kindle ed.). 3323–3342: Penguin. ISBN 978-0141976372.  
    ^  Shapiro & Epstein 2006, p. 329. 
    ^  "Were they always called World War I and World War II?". Ask History. Retrieved 24 October  2013 .  
    ^  Braybon 2004, p. 8. 
    ^  "great, adj., adv., and n". Oxford English Dictionary.  
    ^  "The war to end all wars". BBC News. 10 November 1998. Retrieved 15 December  2015 .  
    ^  Margery Fee and Janice McAlpine. Guide to Canadian English Usage. (Oxford UP, 1997), p. 210. 
    ^  Clark 2014, pp. 121–152. 
    ^  H.P. Willmott, World War I, Dorling Kindersley, 2003 
    ^  Keegan 1998, p. 52. 
    ^  Medlicott, W.N. (1945). "Bismarck and the Three Emperors' Alliance, 1881–87". Transactions of the Royal Historical Society. 27: 66–70. doi:10.2307/3678575. JSTOR 3678575.  
    ^  Keenan, George (1986). The Fateful Alliance: France, Russia and the Coming of the First World War. Manchester University Press. p. 20. ISBN 978-0719017070.  
    ^  Willmott 2003, p. 15 
    ^ a b  Willmott 2003, p. 21 
    ^  Holger Herwig,"The Failure of German Sea Power, 1914–1945: Mahan, Tirpitz, and Raeder Reconsidered", The International History Review, 10:1 (February 1988), 72–73. 
    ^  Moll, Kendall, Luebbert, Gregory (1980). "Arms Race and Military Expenditure Models: A Review". The Journal of Conflict Resolution. 24 (1): 153–185. doi:10.1177/002200278002400107. JSTOR 173938.  
    ^  Poon, H.W. "Militarism; the Arms Race" (PDF) . The Corner; World War I. University of Arizona. Retrieved 22 August  2018 .  
    ^  Keegan 1998, pp. 48–49. 
    ^  Willmott 2003, pp. 2–23. 
    ^  Finestone, Jeffrey; Massie, Robert K. (1981). The last courts of Europe. Dent. p. 247.  
    ^  Smith 2010. 
    ^  "European powers maintain focus despite killings in Sarajevo  – This Day in History". History.com. 30 June 1914. Retrieved 26 December  2013 .  
    ^  Willmott 2003, p. 26. 
    ^  Clark, Christopher (25 June 2014). Month of Madness. BBC Radio 4.  
    ^  Djordjević, Dimitrije; Spence, Richard B. (1992). Scholar, patriot, mentor: historical essays in honor of Dimitrije Djordjević. East European Monographs. p. 313. ISBN 978-0-88033-217-0. Following the assassination of Franz Ferdinand in June 1914, Croats and Muslims in Sarajevo joined forces in an anti-Serb pogrom.  
    ^  Reports Service: Southeast Europe series. American Universities Field Staff. 1964. p. 44. Retrieved 7 December  2013 . ... the assassination was followed by officially encouraged anti-Serb riots in Sarajevo ...  
    ^  Kröll, Herbert (2008). Austrian-Greek encounters over the centuries: history, diplomacy, politics, arts, economics. Studienverlag. p. 55. ISBN 978-3-7065-4526-6. Retrieved 1 September  2013 . ... arrested and interned some 5.500 prominent Serbs and sentenced to death some 460 persons, a new Schutzkorps, an auxiliary militia, widened the anti-Serb repression.  
    ^  Tomasevich 2001, p. 485. 
    ^  Schindler, John R. (2007). Unholy Terror: Bosnia, Al-Qa'ida, and the Rise of Global Jihad. Zenith Imprint. p. 29. ISBN 978-1-61673-964-5.  
    ^  Velikonja 2003, p. 141. 
    ^  Stevenson 1996, p. 12. 
    ^  Willmott 2003, p. 27. 
    ^  Fromkin, David; Europe's Last Summer: Why the World Went to War in 1914, Heinemann, 2004; pp. 196–97. 
    ^  (Levy & Vasques 2014, p. 250) 
    ^  "Verordnung, betreffend die Erklärung des Kriegszustandes". Reichs-gesetzblatt (in German). 31 July 1914. LCCN 14013198.  
    ^  The Telegraph, First World War centenary: how the events of 1 August 1914 unfolded 
    ^  McMeekin, Sean, July 1914: Countdown to War, Basic Books, 2014, 480 p., ISBN 978-0465060740, pp. 342, 349 
    ^  Crowe 2001, pp. 4–5. 
    ^  Dell, Pamela (2013). A World War I Timeline (Smithsonian War Timelines Series). Capstone. pp. 10–12. ISBN 978-1-4765-4159-4.  
    ^  Willmott 2003, p. 29. 
    ^  "Daily Mirror Headlines: The Declaration of War, Published 4 August 1914". BBC. Retrieved 9 February  2010 .  
    ^  Strachan 2003, pp. 292–296, 343–354. 
    ^  Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 172. 
    ^  Schindler, John R. (1 April 2002). "Disaster on the Drina: The Austro-Hungarian Army in Serbia, 1914". War in History. 9 (2): 159–195. doi:10.1191/0968344502wh250oa. Retrieved 13 March  2013 .  
    ^  Serbia, RTS, Radio televizija Srbije, Radio Television of. "Veliki rat - Avijacija". rts.rs.  
    ^  "How was the first military airplane shot down". National Geographic. Archived from the original on 31 August 2015. Retrieved 5 August  2015 .  
    ^  Horne, Alistair (1964). The Price of Glory (1993 ed.). Penguin. p. 22. ISBN 978-0140170412.  
    ^  Holmes 2014, pp. 194, 211. 
    ^  Stevenson, David (2012). 1914–1918: The History of the First World War. Penguin. p. 54. ISBN 978-0718197957.  
    ^  Jackson, Julian (2018). A Certain Idea of France: The Life of Charles de Gaulle. Allen Lane. p. 55. ISBN 978-1846143519.  
    ^  Lieven, Dominic (2016). Towards the Flame: Empire, War and the End of Tsarist Russia. Penguin. p. 327. ISBN 978-0141399744.  
    ^  Tucker & Roberts 2005, pp. 376–378. 
    ^  Horne, Alistair (1964). The Price of Glory (1993 ed.). Penguin. p. 221. ISBN 978-0140170412.  
    ^  Donko, Wilhelm M. (2012). A Brief History of the Austrian Navy epubli GmbH, Berlin, p. 79 
    ^  Keegan 1998, pp. 224–232. 
    ^  Falls 1960, pp. 79–80. 
    ^  Farwell 1989, p. 353. 
    ^  Brown 1994, pp. 197–198. 
    ^  Brown 1994, pp. 201–203. 
    ^  "Participants from the Indian subcontinent in the First World War". Memorial Gates Trust. Retrieved 12 December  2008 .  
    ^  Horniman, Benjamin Guy. British administration and the Amritsar massacre. Mittal Publications, 1984. Pg. 45. 
    ^  Raudzens 1990, p. 424. 
    ^  Raudzens 1990, pp. 421–423. 
    ^  Goodspeed 1985, p. 199 (footnote). 
    ^  Duffy, Michael (22 August 2009). "Weapons of War: Poison Gas". Firstworldwar.com. Retrieved 5 July  2012 .  
    ^  Love 1996. 
    ^  Dupuy 1993, p. 1042. 
    ^  Grant 2005, p. 276. 
    ^  Lichfield, John (21 February 2006). "Verdun: myths and memories of the 'lost villages' of France". The Independent. Retrieved 23 July  2013 .  
    ^  Harris 2008, p. 271. 
    ^  "Living conditions". Trench Warfare. Archived from the original on 20 April 2018. Retrieved 19 April  2018 .  
    ^  Valentine 2006. 
    ^  Anderson, Susan (29 August 2006). "Analysis of Spanish flu cases in 1918–1920 suggests transfusions might help in bird flu pandemic". American College of Physicians. Retrieved 28 September  2018 .  
    ^  Porras-Gallo & Davis 2014. 
    ^  Barry 2004, p. 171. 
    ^  Galvin 2007. 
    ^  Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 1221. 
    ^  Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 854. 
    ^  Keegan 1998, pp. 325–326. 
    ^  Strachan 2003, p. 244. 
    ^  Inglis 1995, p. 2. 
    ^  Humphries 2007, p. 66. 
    ^  "The Naval Balance of Power in 1914". 4 August 2014.  
    ^  Sempa, Francis P. (30 December 2014). "The Geopolitical Vision of Alfred Thayer Mahan". thediplomat.com. The Diplomat. Retrieved 28 April  2018 .  
    ^  Taylor 2007, pp. 39–47. 
    ^  Keene 2006, p. 5. 
    ^  Halpern 1995, p. 293. 
    ^  Zieger 2001, p. 50. 
    ^  Jeremy Black (June 2016). "Jutland's Place in History". Naval History. 30 (3): 16–21.  
    ^ a b c d  Sheffield, Garry. "The First Battle of the Atlantic". World Wars in Depth. BBC. Retrieved 11 November  2009 .  
    ^  Gilbert 2004, p. 306. 
    ^  von der Porten 1969. 
    ^  Jones 2001, p. 80. 
    ^  Nova Scotia House of Assembly Committee on Veterans' Affairs (9 November 2006). "Committee Hansard". Hansard. Retrieved 12 March  2013 .  
    ^  Chickering, Roger; Förster, Stig; Greiner, Bernd (2005). A world at total war: global conflict and the politics of destruction, 1937–1945. Publications of the German Historical Institute. Washington, DC: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-83432-2.  
    ^ a b  Price 1980 
    ^  "The Balkan Wars and World War I". p. 28. Library of Congress Country Studies. 
    ^  Tucker, Spencer; Roberts, Priscilla Mary (2005). World War One. ABC-CLIO. pp. 241–. ISBN 978-1-85109-420-2.  
    ^  Neiberg 2005, pp. 54–55. 
    ^  Tucker & Roberts 2005, pp. 1075–1076. 
    ^  DiNardo 2015, p. 102. 
    ^  Neiberg 2005, pp. 108–110. 
    ^  Hall, Richard (2010). Balkan Breakthrough: The Battle of Dobro Pole 1918. Indiana University Press. p. 11. ISBN 978-0-253-35452-5.  
    ^  Tucker, Wood & Murphy 1999, pp. 150–152. 
    ^  Korsun, N. "The Balkan Front of the World War" (in Russian). militera.lib.ru. Retrieved 27 September  2010 .  
    ^  Doughty 2005, p. 491. 
    ^  Gettleman, Marvin; Schaar, Stuart, eds. (2003). The Middle East and Islamic world reader (4th pr. ed.). New York: Grove Press. pp. 119–120. ISBN 978-0-8021-3936-8.  
    ^  January, Brendan (2007). Genocide : modern crimes against humanity. Minneapolis, Minn.: Twenty-First Century Books. p. 14. ISBN 978-0-7613-3421-7.  
    ^  Lieberman, Benjamin (2013). The Holocaust and Genocides in Europe. New York: Continuum Publishing Corporation. pp. 80–81. ISBN 978-1-4411-9478-7.  
    ^  Arthur J. Barker, The Neglected War: Mesopotamia, 1914–1918 (London: Faber, 1967) 
    ^  Crawford, John; McGibbon, Ian (2007). New Zealand's Great War: New Zealand, the Allies and the First World War. Exisle Publishing. pp. 219–220.  
    ^  Fromkin 2004, p. 119. 
    ^ a b  Hinterhoff 1984, pp. 499–503 
    ^  a b c The Encyclopedia Americana, 1920, v.28, p.403 
    ^  a b c d e f g (Northcote 1922, pp. 788) 
    ^  Sachar 1970, pp. 122–138. 
    ^  Gilbert 1994. 
    ^  Hanioglu, M. Sukru (2010). A Brief History of the Late Ottoman Empire. Princeton University Press. pp. 180–181. ISBN 978-0-691-13452-9.  
    ^  Gardner, Hall (2015). The Failure to Prevent World War I: The Unexpected Armageddon. Ashgate. p. 120.  
    ^  Page, Thomas Nelson (1920). Italy and the world war. Scribners. pp. 142–208.  
    ^  Marshall|page=108 
    ^  Thompson, Mark. The White War: Life and Death on the Italian Front, 1915–1919. London: Faber and Faber. p. 163.  
    ^  Giuseppe Praga, Franco Luxardo. History of Dalmatia. Giardini, 1993. p. 281. 
    ^ a b  Paul O'Brien. Mussolini in the First World War: the Journalist, the Soldier, the Fascist. Oxford, England; New York: Berg, 2005. p. 17. 
    ^  Hickey 2003, pp. 60–65. 
    ^  Tucker 2005, pp. 585–589. 
    ^  Laurentiu-Cristian Dumitru, Preliminaries of Romania's entering the World War I, No. 1/2012, Bulletin of "Carol I" National Defence University, Bucharest, p.171 
    ^  Michael B. Barrett, Prelude to Blitzkrieg: The 1916 Austro-German Campaign in Romania (2013) 
    ^  Cyril Falls, The Great War, p. 285 
    ^  Clark, Charles Upson (1927). Bessarabia. New York City: Dodd, Mead. 
    ^  Béla, Köpeczi. Erdély története. Akadémiai Kiadó.  
    ^  Béla, Köpeczi (1998). History of Transylvania. Akadémiai Kiadó. ISBN 978-84-8371-020-3.  
    ^  Erlikman, Vadim (2004). Потери народонаселения в 20. веке [The loss of population in the 20th Century] (in Russian). Moscow: Русская панорама. ISBN 978-5931651071.  
    ^  Tucker 2005, p. 715. 
    ^  Meyer 2006, pp. 152–154, 161, 163, 175, 182. 
    ^  Smele 
    ^  Schindler 2003. 
    ^  Neiberg, Michael (2014). The Cambridge History of the First World War (1 ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 110–132.  
    ^  "How Germany got the Russian Revolution off the ground". Deutsche Welle. 7 November 2017.  
    ^  Wheeler-Bennett, John W. (1938). Brest-Litovsk : The forgotten peace. London: Macmillan. pp. 36–41.  
    ^  Mawdsley 2008, pp. 54–55. 
    ^ a b  Alexander Lanoszka, Michael A. Hunzeker (11 November 2018). "Why the First War lasted so long". Washington Post. Retrieved 11 November  2018 .  
    ^ a b  Keegan 1998, p. 345. 
    ^  Kernek 1970, pp. 721–766. 
    ^  Marshall, 292. 
    ^  Heyman 1997, pp. 146–147. 
    ^  Kurlander 2006. 
    ^  Shanafelt 1985, pp. 125–130. 
    ^  Erickson, Edward J. (2001). Ordered to Die: A History of the Ottoman Army in the First World War: Forward by General Hüseyiln Kivrikoglu. No. 201 Contributions in Military Studies. Westport Connecticut: Greenwood Press. p. 163. OCLC 43481698.  
    ^  Moore, A. Briscoe (1920). The Mounted Riflemen in Sinai & Palestine: The Story of New Zealand's Crusaders. Christchurch: Whitcombe & Tombs. p. 67. OCLC 156767391.  
    ^  Falls, Cyril (1930). Military Operations Egypt & Palestine from June 1917 to the End of the War. Official History of the Great War Based on Official Documents by Direction of the Historical Section of the Committee of Imperial Defence. Volume 2 Part I. Maps by A.F. Becke. London: HM Stationery Office. p. 59. OCLC 644354483.  
    ^  Wavell, Earl (1968) [1933]. "The Palestine Campaigns". In Sheppard, Eric William (ed.). A Short History of the British Army (4th ed.). London: Constable & Co. pp. 153–155. OCLC 35621223.  
    ^  "Text of the Decree of the Surrender of Jerusalem into British Control". First World War.com. Archived from the original on 14 June 2011. Retrieved 13 May  2015 .  
    ^  Bruce, Anthony (2002). The Last Crusade: The Palestine Campaign in the First World War. London: John Murray. p. 162. ISBN 978-0-7195-5432-2.  
    ^  "Who's Who – Kress von Kressenstein". First World War.com. Retrieved 13 May  2015 .  
    ^  "Who's Who – Otto Liman von Sanders". First World War.com. Retrieved 13 May  2015 .  
    ^  Erickson, Edward J. (2001). Ordered to Die: A History of the Ottoman Army in the First World War: Forward by General Hüseyiln Kivrikoglu. No. 201 Contributions in Military Studies. Westport Connecticut: Greenwood Press. p. 195. OCLC 43481698.  
    ^  Daily Telegraph Wednesday 15 August 1917, reprinted on p. 26 of Daily Telegraph Tuesday 15 August 2017 
    ^  Brands 1997, p. 756. 
    ^  "Wilson for 'America First'", The Chicago Daily Tribune (12 October 1915). 
    ^  Cooper, John Milton. Woodrow Wilson: A Biography, p. 278 (Vintage Books 2011). 
    ^  Garrett, Garet. Defend America First: The Antiwar Editorials of the Saturday Evening Post, 1939–1942, p. 13 (Caxton Press 2003). 
    ^  Tuchman 1966. 
    ^ a b  Karp 1979 
    ^  "Woodrow Wilson Urges Congress to Declare War on Germany" (Wikisource) 
    ^  "Selective Service System: History and Records". Sss.gov. Archived from the original on 7 May 2009. Retrieved 27 July  2010 .  
    ^  Stone, David (2014). The Kaiser's Army: The German Army in World War One. London: COnway. ISBN 978-1844862924.  
    ^  "Teaching With Documents: Photographs of the 369th Infantry and African Americans during World War I". US National Archives and Records Administration. Archived from the original on 4 June 2009. Retrieved 29 October  2009 .  
    ^  Millett & Murray 1988, p. 143. 
    ^  Westwell 2004. 
    ^  Posen 1984, p. 190. 
    ^  Gray 1991, p. 86. 
    ^  Moon 1996, pp. 495–196. 
    ^  Rickard 2007. 
    ^  Hovannisian 1967, pp. 1–39. 
    ^  Ayers 1919, p. 104. 
    ^  Schreiber, Shane B. (2004) [1977]. Shock Army of the British Empire: The Canadian Corps in the Last 100 Days of the Great War. St. Catharines, ON: Vanwell. ISBN 978-1-55125-096-0. OCLC 57063659.  
    ^  Rickard 2001. 
    ^  Brown, Malcolm (1999) [1998]. 1918: Year of Victory. London: Pan. p. 190. ISBN 978-0-330-37672-3.  
    ^ a b  Pitt 2003 
    ^ a b c d  Gray & Argyle 1990 
    ^  Terraine 1963. 
    ^  Nicholson 1962. 
    ^  Ludendorff 1919. 
    ^  McLellan, p. 49. 
    ^  Christie, Norm M. (1997). The Canadians at Cambrai and the Canal du Nord, August–September 1918. For King and Empire: A Social History and Battlefield Tour. CEF Books. ISBN 978-1-896979-18-2. OCLC 166099767.  
    ^  Stevenson 2004, p. 380. 
    ^  Hull 2006, pp. 307–310. 
    ^ a b  Stevenson 2004, p. 383. 
    ^  Painter 2012, p. 25. Over the course of the war the United States supplied more than 80 percent of Allied oil requirements, and after US entry into the war, the United States helped provide and protect tankers transporting oil to Europe. US oil resources meant that insufficient energy supplies did not hamper the Allies, as they did the Central Powers. 
    ^  "K. Kuhl: Die 14 Kieler Punkte (The Kiel 14 points)" (PDF) .  
    ^  D. Dähnhardt: Revolution in Kiel. Karl Wachholtz Verlag, Neumünster 1978, p. 91. 
    ^  Wolfram Wette: "Die Novemberrevolution – Kiel 1918", in Fleischhauer und Turowski: "Kieler Erinnerungsorte", Boyens, 2006. 
    ^  Stevenson 2004, p. 385. 
    ^  Stevenson 2004, Chapter 17. 
    ^  Andrea Di Michele (2014). "Trento, Bolzano E Innsbruck: L'occupazione Militare Italiana Del Tirolo (1918–1920)" [Trento, Bolzano and Innsbruck: The Italian Military Occupation of Tyrol (1918–1920)] (PDF) . Trento e Trieste. Percorsi Degli Italiani d'Austria Dal '48 All'annessione (in Italian): 436–437. Archived from the original (PDF)  on 2 October 2018. La forza numerica del contingente italiano variò con il passare dei mesi e al suo culmine raggiunse i 20–22.000 uomini. [The numerical strength of the Italian contingent varied with the passing of months and at its peak reached 20–22,000 men.]  ← see https://www.agiati.it/memorie-trento-e-trieste-rasera-caffieri for metadata --> 
    ^  "Clairière de l'Armistice" (in French). Ville de Compiègne. Archived from the original on 27 August 2007.  
    ^  Baker 2006. 
    ^  Chickering 2004, pp. 185–188. 
    ^  Gerd Hardach, The First World War, 1914–1918 (1977) p. 153, using estimated made by H. Menderhausen, The Economics of War (1941) p. 305 
    ^  "France's oldest WWI veteran dies" Archived 28 October 2016 at the Wayback Machine, BBC News, 20 January 2008. 
    ^  Tucker, Spencer (2005). Encyclopedia of World War I. ABC-CLIO. p. 273. ISBN 978-1-85109-420-2.  
    ^  Hastedt, Glenn P. (2009). Encyclopedia of American Foreign Policy. Infobase Publishing. p. 483. ISBN 978-1-4381-0989-3.  
    ^  Murrin, John; Johnson, Paul; McPherson, James; Gerstle, Gary; Fahs, Alice (2010). Liberty, Equality, Power: A History of the American People. II. Cengage Learning. p. 622. ISBN 978-0-495-90383-3.  
    ^  Staff (3 July 1921). "Harding Ends War; Signs Peace Decree at Senator's Home. Thirty Persons Witness Momentous Act in Frelinghuysen Living Room at Raritan". The New York Times.  
    ^  "No. 31773". The London Gazette. 10 February 1920. p. 1671.  
    ^  "No. 31991". The London Gazette. 23 July 1920. pp. 7765–7766.  
    ^  "No. 13627". The London Gazette. 27 August 1920. p. 1924.  
    ^  "No. 32421". The London Gazette. 12 August 1921. pp. 6371–6372.  
    ^  "No. 32964". The London Gazette. 12 August 1924. pp. 6030–6031.  
    ^  Magliveras 1999, pp. 8–12. 
    ^  Northedge 1986, pp. 35–36. 
    ^  Morrow, John H. (2005). The Great War: An Imperial History. London: Routledge. p. 290. ISBN 978-0-415-20440-8.  
    ^  Schulze, Hagen (1998). Germany: A New History. Harvard U.P. p. 204.  
    ^  Ypersele, Laurence Van (2012). Horne, John (ed.). Mourning and Memory, 1919–45. A Companion to World War I. Wiley. p. 584.  
    ^  "The Surrogate Hegemon in Polish Postcolonial Discourse Ewa Thompson, Rice University" (PDF) .  
    ^  Kocsis, Károly; Hodosi, Eszter Kocsisné (1998). Ethnic Geography of the Hungarian Minorities in the Carpathian Basin. p. 19. ISBN 978-963-7395-84-0.  
    ^  Clark 1927. 
    ^  "8 Facts You Might Not Have Known About Andorra". 30 June 2011.  
    ^  "The 44-year war between Germany and Andorra". 3 April 2016.  
    ^  "9 wars that were technically ongoing due to quirks of diplomacy".  
    ^  "25 things you might not know about WWI". 24 June 2014.  
    ^  "Appeals to Americans to Pray for Serbians" (PDF) . The New York Times. 27 July 1918.  
    ^  "Serbia Restored" (PDF) . The New York Times. 5 November 1918.  
    ^  Simpson, Matt (22 August 2009). "The Minor Powers During World War One – Serbia". firstworldwar.com.  
    ^  "' ANZAC Day' in London; King, Queen, and General Birdwood at Services in Abbey". The New York Times. 26 April 1916.  
    ^  Australian War Memorial. "The ANZAC Day tradition". Australian War Memorial. Archived from the original on 1 May 2008. Retrieved 2 May  2008 .  
    ^  Canadian War Museum. "Vimy Ridge". Canadian War Museum. Retrieved 22 October  2008 .  
    ^  "The War's Impact on Canada". Canadian War Museum. Retrieved 22 October  2008 .  
    ^  "Canada's last WW1 vet gets his citizenship back". CBC News. 9 May 2008. Archived from the original on 11 May 2008.  
    ^  Documenting Democracy Archived 20 May 2016 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 31 March 2012 
    ^  "Balfour Declaration (United Kingdom 1917)". Encyclopædia Britannica.  
    ^  "Timeline of The Jewish Agency for Israel:1917–1919". The Jewish Agency for Israel. Archived from the original on 20 May 2013. Retrieved 29 August  2013 .  
    ^  Doughty 2005. 
    ^  Hooker 1996. 
    ^  Muller 2008. 
    ^  Kaplan 1993. 
    ^  Salibi 1993. 
    ^  Evans 2005 
    ^  Israeli Foreign Ministry. 
    ^  Gelvin 2005 
    ^  Isaac & Hosh 1992. 
    ^ a b  Sanhueza, Carlos (2011). "El debate sobre "el embrujamiento alemán" y el papel de la ciencia alemana hacia fines del siglo XIX en Chile" (PDF) . Ideas viajeras y sus objetos. El intercambio científico entre Alemania y América austral. Madrid–Frankfurt am Main: Iberoamericana–Vervuert (in Spanish). pp. 29–40.  
    ^  Penny, H. Glenn (2017). "Material Connections: German Schools, Things, and Soft Power in Argentina and Chile from the 1880s through the Interwar Period". Comparative Studies in Society and History. 59 (3): 519–549. doi:10.1017/S0010417517000159.  
    ^  Kitchen 2000, p. 22. 
    ^  Howard, N.P. (1993). The Social and Political Consequences of the Allied Food Blockade of Germany, 1918–19 (PDF) . German History. 11. pp. 161–188.  table p. 166, with 271,000 excess deaths in 1918 and 71,000 in the first half of 1919 while the blockade was still in effect. 
    ^  Saadi 2009. 
    ^  Patenaude, Bertrand M. (30 January 2007). "Food as a Weapon". Hoover Digest. Hoover Institution. Archived from the original on 19 July 2008. Retrieved 14 August  2014 .  
    ^  Ball 1996, pp. 16, 211. 
    ^  "The Russians are coming (Russian influence in Harbin, Manchuria, China; economic relations)". The Economist (US). 14 January 1995. Archived from the original on 10 May 2007.  (via Highbeam.com) 
    ^  Souter 2000, p. 354. 
    ^  Tucker, Spencer (2005). Encyclopedia of World War I. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO. p. 273. ISBN 978-1-85109-420-2. Retrieved 7 May  2010 .  
    ^  Tschanz. 
    ^  Conlon. 
    ^  Taliaferro, William Hay (1972). Medicine and the War. p. 65. ISBN 978-0-8369-2629-3.  
    ^  Knobler 2005. 
    ^  Kamps, Bernd Sebastian; Reyes-Terán, Gustavo. Influenza. Influenza Report. Flying Publisher. ISBN 978-3-924774-51-6. Retrieved 17 November  2009 .  
    ^  K. von Economo.Wiener klinische Wochenschrift, 10 May 1917, 30: 581–585. Die Encephalitis lethargica. Leipzig and Vienna, Franz Deuticke, 1918. 
    ^  Reid, A.H.; McCall, S.; Henry, J.M.; Taubenberger, J.K. (2001). "Experimenting on the Past: The Enigma of von Economo's Encephalitis Lethargica". J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 60 (7): 663–670. doi:10.1093/jnen/60.7.663. PMID 11444794.  
    ^  "Pogroms". Encyclopaedia Judaica. American-Israeli Cooperative Enterprise. Retrieved 17 November  2009 .  
    ^  "Jewish Modern and Contemporary Periods (ca. 1700–1917)". Jewish Virtual Library. American-Israeli Cooperative Enterprise. Retrieved 17 November  2009 .  
    ^  "The Diaspora Welcomes the Pope" Archived 4 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine, Der Spiegel Online. 28 November 2006. 
    ^  R.J. Rummel, "The Holocaust in Comparative and Historical Perspective", 1998, Idea Journal of Social Issues, Vol.3 no.2 
    ^  Hedges, Chris (17 September 2000). "A Few Words in Greek Tell of a Homeland Lost". The New York Times.  
    ^  Hartcup 1988, p. 154. 
    ^  Hartcup 1988, pp. 82–86. 
    ^  Sterling, Christopher H.; Military Communications: From Ancient Times to the 21st Century (2008). Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-85109-732-6 p. 444. 
    ^  Mosier 2001, pp. 42–48. 
    ^  Jager, Herbert (2001). German Artillery of World War One. Crowood Press. p. 224. ISBN 978-1861264039.  
    ^  Hartcup 1988. 
    ^  Raudzens 1990, p. 421. 
    ^ a b  Wilfred Owen: poems, (Faber and Faber, 2004) 
    ^  Raudzens 1990. 
    ^  Heller 1984. 
    ^  Postwar pulp novels on future "gas wars" included Reginald Glossop's 1932 novel Ghastly Dew and Neil Bell's 1931 novel The Gas War of 1940. 
    ^  "Heavy Railroad Artillery"  on YouTube 
    ^  Lawrence Sondhaus, The Great War at Sea: A Naval History of the First World War (2014). 
    ^  Lawson, Eric; Lawson, Jane (2002). The First Air Campaign: August 1914– November 1918. Da Capo Press. p. 123. ISBN 978-0-306-81213-2.  
    ^ a b  Cross 1991 
    ^  Cross 1991, pp. 56–57. 
    ^  "Manfred von Richthofen". theaerodrome.com. Retrieved 21 April  2019 .  
    ^  Winter 1983. 
    ^ a b  Johnson 2001 
    ^  Halpern, Paul G. (1994). A Naval History of World War I. Routledge, p. 301; ISBN 1-85728-498-4 
    ^  Hadley, Michael L. (1995). Count Not the Dead: The Popular Image of the German Submarine. McGill-Queen's Press – MQUP, p. 36; ISBN 0-7735-1282-9. 
    ^  Davies, J.D. (2013). Britannia's Dragon: A Naval History of Wales. History Press Limited. p. 158. ISBN 978-0-7524-9410-4.  
    ^  "The blockade of Germany". nationalarchives.gov.uk. The National Archives. Retrieved 11 November  2018 .  
    ^  Raico, Ralph (26 April 2010). "The Blockade and Attempted Starvation of Germany". Mises Institute.  
    ^  Cox, Mary Elisabeth (21 September 2014). "Hunger games: or how the Allied blockade in the First World War deprived German children of nutrition, and Allied food aid subsequently saved them. Abstract". The Economic History Review. 68 (2): 600–631. doi:10.1111/ehr.12070. ISSN 0013-0117.  
    ^  Devlin, Patrick (1975). Too Proud to Fight: Woodrow Wilson's Neutrality. New York: Oxford University Press. pp. 193–195.  
    ^  A German attempt in January on the Russian front failed to cause casualties. 
    ^  Schneider, Barry R. (28 February 1999). Future War and Counterproliferation: US Military Responses to NBC. Praeger, p. 84; ISBN 0-275-96278-4 
    ^  Taylor, Telford (1993). The Anatomy of the Nuremberg Trials: A Personal Memoir. Little, Brown and Company. p. 34. ISBN 978-0-316-83400-1. Retrieved 20 June  2013 .  
    ^  Graham, Thomas; Lavera, Damien J. (2003). Cornerstones of Security: Arms Control Treaties in the Nuclear Era. University of Washington Press. pp. 7–9. ISBN 978-0-295-98296-0. Retrieved 5 July  2013 .  
    ^  Haber, L.F. (20 February 1986). The Poisonous Cloud: Chemical Warfare in the First World War. Clarendon Press. pp. 106–108. ISBN 978-0-19-858142-0.  
    ^  Vilensky, Joel A. (20 February 1986). Dew of Death: The Story of Lewisite, America's World War I Weapon of Mass destruction. Indiana University Press. pp. 78–80. ISBN 978-0-253-34612-4.  
    ^  Ellison, D. Hank (24 August 2007). Handbook of Chemical and Biological Warfare Agents, Second Edition. CRC Press. pp. 567–570. ISBN 978-0-8493-1434-6.  
    ^  Boot, Max (2007). War Made New: Weapons, Warriors, and the Making of the Modern World. Gotham. pp. 245–250. ISBN 978-1-59240-315-8.  
    ^  Henry Morgenthau (1918). "XXV: Talaat Tells Why He "Deports" the Armenians". Ambassador Mogenthau's story. Brigham Young University.  
    ^  Honzík, Miroslav; Honzíková, Hana (1984). 1914/1918, Léta zkázy a naděje. Czech Republic: Panorama.  
    ^ a b  International Association of Genocide Scholars (13 June 2005). "Open Letter to the Prime Minister of Turkey Recep Tayyip Erdoğan". Archived from the original on 6 October 2007.  
    ^  Vartparonian, Paul Leverkuehn; Kaiser (2008). A German officer during the Armenian genocide: a biography of Max von Scheubner-Richter. translated by Alasdair Lean; with a preface by Jorge and a historical introduction by Hilmar. London: Taderon Press for the Gomidas Institute. ISBN 978-1-903656-81-5.  
    ^  Ferguson 2006, p. 177. 
    ^  "International Association of Genocide Scholars" (PDF) . Retrieved 12 March  2013 .  
    ^  Fromkin 1989, pp. 212–215. 
    ^  International Association of Genocide Scholars. "Resolution on genocides committed by the Ottoman empire" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF)  on 22 April 2008.  
    ^  Gaunt, David (2006). Massacres, Resistance, Protectors: Muslim-Christian Relations in Eastern Anatolia during World War I. Piscataway, New Jersey: Gorgias Press.  
    ^  Schaller, Dominik J.; Zimmerer, Jürgen (2008). "Late Ottoman genocides: the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire and Young Turkish population and extermination policies – introduction". Journal of Genocide Research. 10 (1): 7–14. doi:10.1080/14623520801950820.  
    ^  Whitehorn, Alan (2015). The Armenian Genocide: The Essential Reference Guide: The Essential Reference Guide. ABC-CLIO. pp. 83, 218. ISBN 978-1610696883.  
    ^  "Pogroms". Encyclopaedia Judaica. Jewish Virtual Library. Retrieved 17 November  2009 .  
    ^  Mawdsley, Evan (2007). The Russian Civil War. New York: Pegasus Books. p. 287. ISBN 9781681770093.  
    ^  Horne & Kramer 2001, ch 1–2, esp. p. 76. 
    ^  The claim of franc-tireurs in Belgium has been rejected: Horne & Kramer 2001, ch 3–4 
    ^  Horne & Kramer 2001, ch 5–8. 
    ^  Keegan 1998, pp. 82–83. 
    ^  "Search Results (+(war:"worldwari")) : Veterans History Project". American Folklife Center, Library of Congress. Retrieved 23 May  2017 .  
    ^  Phillimore & Bellot 1919, pp. 4–64. 
    ^  Ferguson 1999, pp. 368–369. 
    ^  Blair 2005. 
    ^  Cook 2006, pp. 637–665. 
    ^  "Максим Оськин – Неизвестные трагедии Первой мировой Пленные Дезертиры Беженцы – стр 24 – Читаем онлайн". Profismart.ru. Archived from the original on 17 April 2013. Retrieved 13 March  2013 .  
    ^  Speed 1990. 
    ^  Ferguson 1999, Chapter 13. 
    ^  Morton 1992. 
    ^  Bass 2002, p. 107. 
    ^  "The Mesopotamia campaign". British National Archives. Retrieved 10 March  2007 .  
    ^  "Prisoners of Turkey: Men of Kut Driven along like beasts". Stolen Years: Australian Prisoners of War. Australian War Memorial. Archived from the original on 8 January 2009. Retrieved 10 December  2008 .  
    ^  "ICRC in WWI: overview of activities". Icrc.org. Archived from the original on 19 July 2010. Retrieved 15 June  2010 .  
    ^  "Germany: Notes". Time. 1 September 1924. Retrieved 15 June  2010 .  
    ^  Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 1189. 
    ^ a b  Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 1001 
    ^  Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 117. 
    ^  Mukhtar, Mohammed (2003). Historical Dictionary of Somalia. Scarecrow Press. p. 126. ISBN 978-0810866041. Retrieved 28 February  2017 .  
    ^  "How Ethiopian prince scuppered Germany's WW1 plans". BBC News. 25 September 2016. Retrieved 28 February  2017 .  
    ^  Ficquet, Éloi (2014). The Life and Times of Lïj Iyasu of Ethiopia: New Insights. LIT Verlag Münster. p. 185. ISBN 9783643904768.  
    ^  Zewde, Bahru. A history. p. 126.  
    ^  Ficquet, Éloi (2014). The Life and Times of Lïj Iyasu of Ethiopia: New Insights. LIT Verlag Münster. p. 62. ISBN 9783643904768.  
    ^  Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 1069. 
    ^  Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 884. 
    ^  Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 335. 
    ^  Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 219. 
    ^  Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 209. 
    ^ a b  Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 596 
    ^  Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 826. 
    ^  Dennis Mack Smith. 1997. Modern Italy; A Political History. Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press. p. 284. 
    ^  Aubert, Roger (1981). "Chapter 37: The Outbreak of World War I". In Hubert Jedin; John Dolan (eds.). History of the Church. The Church in the industrial age. 9. Translated by Resch, Margit. London: Burns & Oates. p. 521. ISBN 978-0-86012-091-9.  
    ^  "Who's Who – Pope Benedict XV". firstworldwar.com. 22 August 2009.  
    ^  "Merely For the Record": The Memoirs of Donald Christopher Smith 1894–1980. By Donald Christopher Smith. Edited by John William Cox, Jr. Bermuda. 
    ^  Pennell, Catriona (2012). A Kingdom United: Popular Responses to the Outbreak of the First World War in Britain and Ireland. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-959058-2.  
    ^  Tucker & Roberts 2005, p. 584. 
    ^  O'Halpin, Eunan, The Decline of the Union: British Government in Ireland, 1892–1920, (Dublin, 1987) 
    ^  Lehmann & van der Veer 1999, p. 62. 
    ^  Brock, Peter, These Strange Criminals: An Anthology of Prison Memoirs by Conscientious Objectors to Military Service from the Great War to the Cold War, p. 14, Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2004, ISBN 0-8020-8707-8 
    ^  "Soviet Union – Uzbeks". Country-data.com. Retrieved 13 March  2013 .  
    ^  Richard Pipes (1990). The Russian Revolution. Knopf Doubleday. p. 407. ISBN 9780307788573.  
    ^ a b  Seton-Watson, Christopher. 1967. Italy from Liberalism to Fascism: 1870 to 1925. London: Methuen & Co. Ltd. p. 471 
    ^  Cockfield 1997, pp. 171–237. 
    ^  Sowers, Steven W. "Legacy of 1917 and 1918". Michigan State University.  
    ^  Alan J. Ward, "Lloyd George and the 1918 Irish conscription crisis". Historical Journal (1974) 17#1 pp. 107–129. 
    ^  "The Conscription Crisis". CBC. 2001.  
    ^ a b  "Commonwealth Parliament from 1901 to World War I". Parliament of Australia. 4 May 2015. Retrieved 15 December  2018 .  
    ^  J.M. Main, Conscription: the Australian debate, 1901–1970 (1970) abstract Archived 7 July 2015 at Archive.today 
    ^  Havighurst 1985, p. 131. 
    ^  Chelmsford, J.E. "Clergy and Man-Power", The Times 15 April 1918, p. 12 
    ^  John Whiteclay Chambers, To raise an army: The draft comes to modern America (1987). 
    ^  Howard Zinn, People's History of the United States. (Harper Collins, 2003): 134 
    ^  Hastings, Max (2013). Catastrophe: Europe goes to War 1914. London: Collins. pp. 30, 140. ISBN 978-0-00-746764-8.  
    ^  David Stevenson, The First World War and International Politics (1988). 
    ^  Z.A.B. Zeman, Diplomatic History of the First World War (1971) 
    ^  See, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. Official Statements of War Aims and Peace Proposals: December 1916 to November 1918, edited by James Brown Scott. (1921) 515pp online free 
    ^  R.G. Collingwood An Autobiography, 1939, p. 90. 
    ^  Heather Jones, "As the centenary approaches: the regeneration of First World War historiography". Historical Journal (2013) 56#3 pp. 857–878 [858] 
    ^  "John McCrae". Nature. Historica. 100 (2521): 487. 1918. Bibcode:1918Natur.100..487.. doi:10.1038/100487b0. Archived from the original on 9 June 2011.  
    ^  David, Evans (1918). "John McCrae". Nature. 100 (2521): 487. Bibcode:1918Natur.100..487.. doi:10.1038/100487b0.  
    ^  "Monumental Undertaking". kclibrary.org. 21 September 2015.  
    ^  "Commemoration website". 1914.org. Retrieved 28 February  2014 .  
    ^  "French, German Presidents Mark World War I Anniversary". France News.Net. Retrieved 3 August  2014 .  
    ^  Sheftall, Mark David (2010). Altered Memories of the Great War: Divergent Narratives of Britain, Australia, New Zealand, and Canada.  
    ^ a b c  Hynes, Samuel Lynn (1991). A war imagined: the First World War and English culture. Atheneum. pp. i–xii. ISBN 978-0-689-12128-9.  
    ^ a b c  Todman 2005, pp. 153–221. 
    ^  Fussell, Paul (2000). The Great War and modern memory. Oxford University Press. pp. 1–78. ISBN 978-0-19-513332-5. Retrieved 18 May  2010 .  
    ^ a b  Todman 2005, pp. xi–xv. 
    ^  Roden. 
    ^  Wohl 1979. 
    ^  Tucker & Roberts 2005, pp. 108–1086. 
    ^  Kitchen, Martin. "The Ending of World War One, and the Legacy of Peace". BBC.  
    ^  "World War II". Britannica Online Encyclopedia. Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. Archived from the original on 24 June 2008. Retrieved 12 November  2009 .  
    ^  Baker, Kevin (June 2006). "Stabbed in the Back! The past and future of a right-wing myth". Harper's Magazine. Archived from the original on 15 July 2006.  
    ^  Chickering 2004. 
    ^  Rubinstein, W.D. (2004). Genocide: a history. Pearson Education. p. 7. ISBN 978-0-582-50601-5.  
    ^  109 in this context – see Long and short scales 
    ^  Henn, Peter (9 March 2015). "Britain FINALLY pays off last of First World War debt as George Osborne redeems £1.9bn".  
    ^  Noakes, Lucy (2006). Women in the British Army: War and the Gentle Sex, 1907–1948. Abingdon, England: Routledge. p. 48. ISBN 978-0-415-39056-9.  
    ^  Green 1938, p. cxxvi. 
    ^  Anton Kaes; Martin Jay; Edward Dimendberg, eds. (1994). "The Treaty of Versailles: The Reparations Clauses". The Weimar Republic Sourcebook. University of California Press. p. 8. ISBN 978-0520909601.  
    ^  Marls, The Myths of Reparations, pp. 231–232 
    ^ a b  Marks, p. 237 
    ^  Marks, pp. 223–234 
    ^  World War One: A Short History By Norman Stone 
    ^  Marks, p. 233 
    ^  Hall, Allan (28 September 2010). "First World War officially ends". The Telegraph. Berlin. Retrieved 15 March  2017 . The final payment of £59.5 million, writes off the crippling debt that was the price for one world war and laid the foundations for another.  
    ^  Suddath, Claire (4 October 2010). "Why Did World War I Just End?". Time. Retrieved 1 July  2013 . World War I ended over the weekend. Germany made its final reparations-related payment for the Great War on Oct. 3, nearly 92 years after the country's defeat by the Allies.  
    ^  "World War I to finally end for Germany this weekend". CNN. 30 September 2010. Retrieved 15 March  2017 . Germany and the Allies can call it even on World War I this weekend.  
    ^  MacMillan, Margaret (25 December 2010). "Ending the War to End All Wars". The New York Times. Retrieved 15 March  2017 . NOT many people noticed at the time, but World War I ended this year.  
    ^ a b  "From Wristwatches To Radio, How World War I Ushered in the Modern World". NPR.  

Bibliography 
For a comprehensive bibliography, see Bibliography of World War I.

    American Battle Monuments Commission (1938). American Armies and Battlefields in Europe: A History, Guide, and Reference Book. US Government Printing Office. OCLC 59803706. 
    Army Art of World War I. United States Army Center of Military History: Smithsonian Institution, National Museum of American History. 1993. OCLC 28608539. 
    Ayers, Leonard Porter (1919). The War with Germany: A Statistical Summary. Government Printing Office. 
    Bade, Klaus J.; Brown, Allison (tr.) (2003). Migration in European History. The making of Europe. Oxford: Blackwell. ISBN 978-0-631-18939-8. OCLC 52695573.  (translated from the German)
    Balakian, Peter (2003). The Burning Tigris: The Armenian Genocide and America's Response. New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-019840-4. OCLC 56822108. 
    Ball, Alan M. (1996). And Now My Soul Is Hardened: Abandoned Children in Soviet Russia, 1918–1930. Berkeley: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-20694-6. , reviewed in Hegarty, Thomas J. (March – June 1998). "And Now My Soul Is Hardened: Abandoned Children in Soviet Russia, 1918–1930". Canadian Slavonic Papers. Archived from the original on 9 May 2013.  (via Highbeam.com)
    Bass, Gary Jonathan (2002). Stay the Hand of Vengeance: The Politics of War Crimes Tribunals. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. pp. 424pp. ISBN 978-0-691-09278-2. OCLC 248021790. 
    Blair, Dale (2005). No Quarter: Unlawful Killing and Surrender in the Australian War Experience, 1915–1918. Charnwood, Australia: Ginninderra Press. ISBN 978-1-74027-291-9. OCLC 62514621. 
    Bond, Brian. "The First World War" in C.L. Mowat, ed. The New Cambridge Modern History: Vol. XII: The Shifting Balance of World Forces 1898–1945 (2nd ed. 1968) online pp. 171–208. scholarly summary.
    Brands, Henry William (1997). T.R.: The Last Romantic. New York: Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-465-06958-3. OCLC 36954615. 
    Braybon, Gail (2004). Evidence, History, and the Great War: Historians and the Impact of 1914–18. Berghahn Books. p. 8. ISBN 978-1-57181-801-0. 
    Brown, Judith M. (1994). Modern India: The Origins of an Asian Democracy. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-873113-9. 
    Chickering, Rodger (2004). Imperial Germany and the Great War, 1914–1918. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-83908-2. OCLC 55523473. 
    Clark, Charles Upson (1927). Bessarabia, Russia and Roumania on the Black Sea. New York: Dodd, Mead. OCLC 150789848. 
    Clark, Christopher (2013). The Sleepwalkers: How Europe Went to War in 1914. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-219922-5. 
    Clark, Christopher (2014). The Sleepwalkers: How Europe Went to War in 1914. New York: Harper Books. ISBN 978-0-06-114666-4. 
    Cockfield, Jamie H. (1997). With snow on their boots : The tragic odyssey of the Russian Expeditionary Force in France during World War I. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-312-22082-2. 
    Conlon, Joseph M. The historical impact of epidemic typhus (PDF) . Montana State University. Archived from the original (PDF)  on 11 June 2010. Retrieved 21 April  2009 . 
    Cook, Tim (2006). "The politics of surrender: Canadian soldiers and the killing of prisoners in the First World War". The Journal of Military History. 70 (3): 637–665. doi:10.1353/jmh.2006.0158. 
    Cross, Wilbur L. (1991). Zeppelins of World War I. New York: Paragon Press. ISBN 978-1-55778-382-0. OCLC 22860189. 
    Crowe, David (2001). The Essentials of European History: 1914 to 1935, World War I and Europe in crisis. Research and Education Association. ISBN 978-0-87891-710-5. 
    DiNardo, Richard (2015). Invasion: The Conquest of Serbia, 1915. Santa Barbara, California: Praeger. ISBN 978-1-4408-0092-4. 
    Djokić, Dejan (2003). Yugoslavism : histories of a failed idea, 1918–1992. London: Hurst. OCLC 51093251. 
    Doughty, Robert A. (2005). Pyrrhic victory: French strategy and operations in the Great War. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-01880-8. 
    Duffy, Michael (2006). Somme. First World War.com. ISBN 978-0-297-84689-5. Retrieved 25 February  2007 . 
    Dupuy, R. Ernest and Trevor N. (1993). The Harper's Encyclopedia of Military History, 4th Edition. Harper Collins Publishers. ISBN 978-0-06-270056-8. 
    Encyclopædia Britannica (12th ed. 1922) comprises the 11th edition plus three new volumes 30-31-32 that cover events since 1911 with thorough coverage of the war as well as every country and colony. partly online and list of article titles
        Abbe to English History (online free). 
        scans of each page of vol 30-31-32
    Evans, David (2004). The First World War. Teach yourself. London: Hodder Arnold. ISBN 978-0-340-88489-8. OCLC 224332259. 
    Evans, Leslie (2005). Future of Iraq, Israel-Palestine Conflict, and Central Asia Weighed at International Conference. UCLA International Institute. Archived from the original on 24 May 2008. Retrieved 30 December  2008 . 
    Falls, Cyril Bentham (1960). The First World War. London: Longmans. ISBN 978-1-84342-272-3. OCLC 460327352. 
    Farwell, Byron (1989). The Great War in Africa, 1914–1918. W.W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-30564-7. 
    Ferguson, Niall (1999). The Pity of War. New York: Basic Books. pp. 563pp. ISBN 978-0-465-05711-5. OCLC 41124439. 
    Ferguson, Niall (2006). The War of the World: Twentieth-Century Conflict and the Descent of the West. New York: Penguin Press. ISBN 978-1-59420-100-4. 
    Fortescue, Granville Roland (28 October 1915). "London in Gloom over Gallipoli; Captain Fortescue in Book and Ashmead-Bartlett in Lecture Declare Campaign Lost". New York Times. 
    Fromkin, David (1989). A Peace to End All Peace: The Fall of the Ottoman Empire and the Creation of the Modern Middle East. New York: Henry Holt and Co. ISBN 978-0-8050-0857-9. 
    Fromkin, David (2004). Europe's Last Summer: Who Started the Great War in 1914?. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-375-41156-4. OCLC 53937943. 
    Gelvin, James L. (2005). The Israel-Palestine Conflict: One Hundred Years of War. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-85289-0. OCLC 59879560. 
    Grant, R.G. (2005). Battle: A Visual Journey Through 5,000 Years of Combat. DK Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7566-5578-5. 
    Gray, Randal; Argyle, Christopher (1990). Chronicle of the First World War. New York: Facts on File. ISBN 978-0-8160-2595-4. OCLC 19398100. 
    Gilbert, Martin (1994). First World War. Stoddart Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7737-2848-6. 
    Gilbert, Martin (2004). The First World War: A Complete History. Clearwater, Florida: Owl Books. p. 306. ISBN 978-0-8050-7617-2. OCLC 34792651. 
    Goodspeed, Donald James (1985). The German Wars 1914–1945. New York: Random House; Bonanza. ISBN 978-0-517-46790-9. 
    Gray, Randal (1991). Kaiserschlacht 1918: the final German offensive. Osprey. ISBN 978-1-85532-157-1. 
    Green, John Frederick Norman (1938). "Obituary: Albert Ernest Kitson". Geological Society Quarterly Journal. 94. 
    Halpern, Paul G. (1995). A Naval History of World War I. New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-1-85728-498-0. OCLC 60281302. 
    Harris, J.P. (2008). Douglas Haig and the First World War (2009 ed.). Cambridge: CUP. ISBN 978-0-521-89802-7. 
    Hartcup, Guy (1988). The War of Invention; Scientific Developments, 1914–18. Brassey's Defence Publishers. ISBN 978-0-08-033591-9. 
    Havighurst, Alfred F. (1985). Britain in transition: the twentieth century (4 ed.). University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-31971-1. 
    Heller, Charles E. (1984). Chemical warfare in World War I : the American experience, 1917–1918. Fort Leavenworth, Kansas: Combat Studies Institute. OCLC 123244486. Archived from the original on 4 July 2007. 
    Heyman, Neil M. (1997). World War I. Guides to historic events of the twentieth century. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-29880-6. OCLC 36292837. 
    Hickey, Michael (2003). The Mediterranean Front 1914–1923. The First World War. 4. New York: Routledge. pp. 60–65. ISBN 978-0-415-96844-7. OCLC 52375688. 
    Hinterhoff, Eugene (1984). Young, Peter (ed.). The Campaign in Armenia. Marshall Cavendish Illustrated Encyclopedia of World War I. ii. New York: Marshall Cavendish. ISBN 978-0-86307-181-2. 
    Hirschfeld, Gerhard et al. eds. Brill's Encyclopedia of the First World War (2012), 1105pp
    Holmes, T.M. (April 2014). "Absolute Numbers: The Schlieffen Plan as a Critique of German Strategy in 1914". War in History. XXI (2): 194, 211. ISSN 1477-0385. 
    Hooker, Richard (1996). The Ottomans. Washington State University. Archived from the original on 8 October 1999. 
    Horne, John; Kramer, Alan (2001). German Atrocities, 1914: A History of Denial. Yale University Press. OCLC 47181922. 
    Hovannisian, Richard G. (1967). Armenia on the Road to Independence, 1918. Berkeley: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-00574-7. 
    Hull, Isabel Virginia (2006). Absolute destruction: military culture and the practices of war in Imperial Germany. Cornell University Press. ISBN 978-0-8014-7293-0. 
    Humphries, Mark Osborne (2007). "" Old Wine in New Bottles": A Comparison of British and Canadian Preparations for the Battle of Arras". In Hayes, Geoffrey; Iarocci, Andrew; Bechthold, Mike (eds.). Vimy Ridge: A Canadian Reassessment. Waterloo: Wilfrid Laurier University Press. pp. 65–85. ISBN 978-0-88920-508-6. 
    Inglis, David (1995). Vimy Ridge: 1917–1992, A Canadian Myth over Seventy Five Years (PDF) . Burnaby: Simon Fraser University. 
    Isaac, Jad; Hosh, Leonardo (7–9 May 1992). Roots of the Water Conflict in the Middle East. University of Waterloo. Archived from the original on 28 September 2006. 
    Jenkins, Burris A. (2009). Facing the Hindenburg Line. BiblioBazaar. ISBN 978-1-110-81238-7. 
    Johnson, James Edgar (2001). Full Circle: The Story of Air Fighting. London: Cassell. ISBN 978-0-304-35860-1. OCLC 45991828. 
    Jones, Howard (2001). Crucible of Power: A History of US Foreign Relations Since 1897. Wilmington, Delaware: Scholarly Resources Books. ISBN 978-0-8420-2918-6. OCLC 46640675. 
    Kaplan, Robert D. (February 1993). "Syria: Identity Crisis". The Atlantic. Retrieved 30 December  2008 . 
    Karp, Walter (1979). The Politics of War (1st ed.). ISBN 978-0-06-012265-2. OCLC 4593327. , Wilson's manoeuvring US into war
    Keegan, John (1998). The First World War. Hutchinson. ISBN 978-0-09-180178-6. , general military history
    Keene, Jennifer D (2006). World War I. Daily Life Through History Series. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press. p. 5. ISBN 978-0-313-33181-7. OCLC 70883191. 
    Kernek, Sterling (December 1970). "The British Government's Reactions to President Wilson's 'Peace' Note of December 1916". The Historical Journal. 13 (4): 721–766. doi:10.1017/S0018246X00009481. JSTOR 2637713. 
    Kitchen, Martin (2000) [1980]. Europe Between the Wars. New York: Longman. ISBN 978-0-582-41869-1. OCLC 247285240. 
    Institute of Medicine (US) Forum on Microbial Threats; Knobler, S. L.; Mack, A.; Mahmoud, A.; Lemon, S. M. (2005). Knobler, Stacey L (ed.). The Threat of Pandemic Influenza: Are We Ready? Workshop Summary. Washington DC: National Academies Press. doi:10.17226/11150. ISBN 978-0-309-09504-4. OCLC 57422232. PMID 20669448. 
    Kurlander, Eric (2006). Steffen Bruendel. Volksgemeinschaft oder Volksstaat: Die "Ideen von 1914" und die Neuordnung Deutschlands im Ersten Weltkrieg. H-net. Archived from the original (Book review)  on 10 June 2007. Retrieved 17 November  2009 . 
    Larsen, Daniel. "Intelligence in the First World War: The state of the field." Intelligence and National Security 29.2 (2014): 282–302.
    Lehmann, Hartmut; van der Veer, Peter, eds. (1999). Nation and religion: perspectives on Europe and Asia. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-01232-2. OCLC 39727826. 
    Love, Dave (May 1996). "The Second Battle of Ypres, April 1915". Sabretache. 26 (4). 
    Lyons, Michael J. (1999). World War I: A Short History (2nd ed.). Prentice Hall. ISBN 978-0-13-020551-3. 
    Ludendorff, Erich (1919). My War Memories, 1914–1918. OCLC 60104290.  also published by Harper as "Ludendorff's Own Story, August 1914 – November 1918: The Great War from the Siege of Liège to the Signing of the Armistice as Viewed from the Grand Headquarters of the German Army" OCLC 561160 (original title Meine Kriegserinnerungen, 1914–1918)
    Magliveras, Konstantinos D. (1999). Exclusion from Participation in International Organisations: The Law and Practice behind Member States' Expulsion and Suspension of Membership. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. ISBN 978-90-411-1239-2. 
    Martel, Gordon (2003). The Origins of the First World War. Pearson Longman, Harlow. 
    Mawdsley, Evan (2008). The Russian Civil War (Edinburgh ed.). Birlinn location. ISBN 978-1-84341-041-6. 
    McLellan, Edwin N. The United States Marine Corps in the World War. 
    Meyer, Gerald J (2006). A World Undone: The Story of the Great War 1914 to 1918. Random House. ISBN 978-0-553-80354-9. 
    Millett, Allan Reed; Murray, Williamson (1988). Military Effectiveness. Boston: Allen Unwin. ISBN 978-0-04-445053-5. OCLC 220072268. 
    Moon, John Ellis van Courtland (July 1996). "United States Chemical Warfare Policy in World War II: A Captive of Coalition Policy?". The Journal of Military History. 60 (3): 495–511. doi:10.2307/2944522. JSTOR 2944522. 
    Morton, Desmond (1992). Silent Battle: Canadian Prisoners of War in Germany, 1914–1919. Toronto: Lester Publishing. ISBN 978-1-895555-17-2. OCLC 29565680. 
    Mosier, John (2001). "Germany and the Development of Combined Arms Tactics". Myth of the Great War: How the Germans Won the Battles and How the Americans Saved the Allies. New York: Harper Collins. ISBN 978-0-06-019676-9. 
    Muller, Jerry Z. (March – April 2008). "Us and Them – The Enduring Power of Ethnic Nationalism". Foreign Affairs. Council on Foreign Relations. Retrieved 30 December  2008 . 
    Neiberg, Michael S. (2005). Fighting the Great War: A Global History. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-01696-5. OCLC 56592292. 
    Nicholson, Gerald W.L. (1962). Canadian Expeditionary Force, 1914–1919: Official History of the Canadian Army in the First World War (1st ed.). Ottawa: Queens Printer and Controller of Stationary. OCLC 2317262. Archived from the original on 16 May 2007. 
    Northedge, F.S. (1986). The League of Nations: Its Life and Times, 1920–1946. New York: Holmes & Meier. ISBN 978-0-7185-1316-0. 
    Page, Thomas Nelson. "Italy and the World War". Brigham Young University. Chapter XI.  cites "Cf. articles signed XXX in La Revue de Deux Mondes, 1 and 15 March 1920"
    Painter, David S. (2012). "Oil and the American Century" (PDF) . The Journal of American History. 99 (1): 24–39. doi:10.1093/jahist/jas073. 
    Phillimore, George Grenville; Bellot, Hugh H.L. (1919). "Treatment of Prisoners of War". Transactions of the Grotius Society. 5: 47–64. OCLC 43267276. 
    Pitt, Barrie (2003). 1918: The Last Act. Barnsley: Pen and Sword. ISBN 978-0-85052-974-6. OCLC 56468232. 
    Price, Alfred (1980). Aircraft versus Submarine: the Evolution of the Anti-submarine Aircraft, 1912 to 1980. London: Jane's Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7106-0008-0. OCLC 10324173.  Deals with technical developments, including the first dipping hydrophones
    Prior, Robin (1999). The First World War. London: Cassell. ISBN 978-0-304-35256-2. 
    Raudzens, George (October 1990). "War-Winning Weapons: The Measurement of Technological Determinism in Military History". The Journal of Military History. 54 (4): 403–434. doi:10.2307/1986064. JSTOR 1986064. 
    Repington, Charles à Court (1920). The First World War, 1914–1918. 2. London: Constable. ISBN 978-1-113-19764-1. 
    Rickard, J. (5 March 2001). "Erich von Ludendorff [sic], 1865–1937, German General". Military History Encyclopedia on the Web. Retrieved 6 February  2008 . 
    Rickard, J. (27 August 2007). "The Ludendorff Offensives, 21 March–18 July 1918". Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 12 September  2018 . 
    Roden, Mike. "The Lost Generation – myth and reality". Aftermath – when the Boys Came Home. Archived from the original on 1 December 2009. Retrieved 6 November  2009 . 
    Saadi, Abdul-Ilah (12 February 2009). "Dreaming of Greater Syria". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 14 August  2014 . 
    Sachar, Howard Morley (1970). The emergence of the Middle East, 1914–1924. Allen Lane. ISBN 978-0-7139-0158-0. OCLC 153103197. 
    Salibi, Kamal Suleiman (1993). "How it all began – A concise history of Lebanon". A House of Many Mansions – the history of Lebanon reconsidered. I.B. Tauris. ISBN 978-1-85043-091-9. OCLC 224705916. 
    Schindler, J. (2003). "Steamrollered in Galicia: The Austro-Hungarian Army and the Brusilov Offensive, 1916". War in History. 10 (1): 27–59. doi:10.1191/0968344503wh260oa. 
    Shanafelt, Gary W. (1985). The secret enemy: Austria-Hungary and the German alliance, 1914–1918. East European Monographs. ISBN 978-0-88033-080-0. 
    Shapiro, Fred R.; Epstein, Joseph (2006). The Yale Book of Quotations. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-10798-2. 
    Smith, David James (2010). One Morning in Sarajevo. Hachette UK. ISBN 978-0-297-85608-5. He was photographed on the way to the station and the photograph has been reproduced many times in books and articles, claiming to depict the arrest of Gavrilo Princip. But there is no photograph of Gavro's arrest—this photograph shows the arrest of Behr. 
    Souter, Gavin (2000). Lion & Kangaroo: the initiation of Australia. Melbourne: Text Publishing. OCLC 222801639. 
    Sisemore, James D. (2003). "The Russo-Japanese War, Lessons Not Learned". US Army Command and General Staff College. 
    Smele, Jonathan. "War and Revolution in Russia 1914–1921". World Wars in-depth. BBC. Archived from the original on 23 October 2011. Retrieved 12 November  2009 . 
    Speed, Richard B, III (1990). Prisoners, Diplomats and the Great War: A Study in the Diplomacy of Captivity. New York: Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-26729-1. OCLC 20694547. 
    Stevenson, David (1996). Armaments and the Coming of War: Europe, 1904–1914. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-820208-0. OCLC 33079190. 
    Stevenson, David (2004). Cataclysm: The First World War as Political Tragedy. New York: Basic Books. pp. 560pp. ISBN 978-0-465-08184-4. OCLC 54001282. 
    Strachan, Hew (2003). The First World War: Volume I: To Arms. New York: Viking. ISBN 978-0-670-03295-2. OCLC 53075929. 
    Taylor, Alan John Percivale (1963). The First World War: An Illustrated History. Hamish Hamilton. ISBN 978-0-399-50260-6. OCLC 2054370. 
    Taylor, Alan John Percivale (1998). The First World War and its aftermath, 1914–1919. Century of Conflict, 1848–1948. London: Folio Society. OCLC 49988231. 
    Taylor, John M. (Summer 2007). "Audacious Cruise of the Emden". The Quarterly Journal of Military History. 19 (4): 38–47. doi:10.1353/jmh.2007.0331 (inactive 25 July 2019). ISSN 0899-3718. 
    Terraine, John (1963). Ordeal of Victory. Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott. pp. 508pp. ISBN 978-0-09-068120-4. OCLC 1345833. 
    Todman, Dan (2005). The Great War: Myth and Memory. A & C Black. ISBN 978-0-8264-6728-7. 
    Tomasevich, Jozo (2001). War and Revolution in Yugoslavia: 1941–1945. Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-7924-1. Retrieved 4 December  2013 . 
    Tschanz, David W. Typhus fever on the Eastern front in World War I. Montana State University. Archived from the original on 11 June 2010. Retrieved 12 November  2009 . 
    Tuchman, Barbara Wertheim (1966). The Zimmermann Telegram (2nd ed.). New York: Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-02-620320-3. OCLC 233392415. 
    Tucker, Spencer C.; Roberts, Priscilla Mary (2005). Encyclopedia of World War I. Santa Barbara: ABC-Clio. ISBN 978-1-85109-420-2. OCLC 61247250. 
    Tucker, Spencer C.; Wood, Laura Matysek; Murphy, Justin D. (1999). The European powers in the First World War: an encyclopedia. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-0-8153-3351-7. 
    Velikonja, Mitja (2003). Religious Separation and Political Intolerance in Bosnia-Herzegovina. Texas A&M University Press. p. 141. ISBN 978-1-58544-226-3. 
    von der Porten, Edward P. (1969). German Navy in World War II. New York: T.Y. Crowell. ISBN 978-0-213-17961-8. OCLC 164543865. 
    Westwell, Ian (2004). World War I Day by Day. St. Paul, Minnesota: MBI Publishing. pp. 192pp. ISBN 978-0-7603-1937-6. OCLC 57533366. 
    Wilgus, William John (1931). Transporting the A.E.F. in Western Europe, 1917–1919. New York: Columbia University Press. OCLC 1161730. 
    Willmott, H.P. (2003). World War I. New York: Dorling Kindersley. ISBN 978-0-7894-9627-0. OCLC 52541937. 
    Winegard, Timothy. "Here at Vimy: A Retrospective – The 90th Anniversary of the Battle of Vimy Ridge". Canadian Military Journal. 8 (2). 
    Winter, Denis (1983). The First of the Few: Fighter Pilots of the First World War. Penguin. ISBN 978-0-14-005256-5. 
    Wohl, Robert (1979). The Generation of 1914 (3 ed.). Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-34466-2. 
    Zieger, Robert H. (2001). America's Great War: World War I and the American experience. Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield. p. 50. ISBN 978-0-8476-9645-1. 
    "History in brief (Israel)". The Economist. 28 July 2005. Retrieved 30 December  2008 . 
    Israeli Foreign Ministry. "Ottoman Rule". Jewish Virtual Library. Retrieved 30 December  2008 . 
    De Groot, Gerard J. (2001). The First World War. Basingstoke: Palgrave. ISBN 978-0-333-74534-2. 
    Turner, Leonard Charles Frederick (1976). Origins of the First World War. London: Edward Arnold. ISBN 978-0-393-09947-8. 
    Henig, Ruth B. (Ruth Beatrice) (1994). The origins of the First World War. London: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-10233-9. 
    Stevenson, David (1988). The First World War and international politics. Oxford: University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-873049-1. 

Primary sources 

    Collins, Ross F. ed. World War I: Primary Documents on Events from 1914 to 1919 (Greenwood Press, 2008) online

Historiography and memory 

    Baker, Kevin (June 2006). "Stabbed in the Back! The past and future of a right-wing myth". Harper's Magazine. 
    Deak, John. "The Great War and the Forgotten Realm: The Habsburg Monarchy and the First World War" Journal of Modern History (2014) 86#2 pp. 336–380.
    Iriye, Akira. "The Historiographic Impact of the Great War". Diplomatic History (July 2014) doi:10.1093/dh/dhu035
    Jones, Heather. "As the centenary approaches: the regeneration of First World War historiography". Historical Journal (2013) 56#3 pp. 857–878.
    Jones, Heather. "Goodbye to all that?: Memory and meaning in the commemoration of the first world war". Juncture (2014) 20#4 pp. 287–291.
    Kitchen, James E., Alisa Miller and Laura Rowe, eds. Other Combatants, Other Fronts: Competing Histories of the First World War (2011) excerpt
    Kramer, Alan. "Recent Historiography of the First World War – Part I", Journal of Modern European History (Feb. 2014) 12#1 pp. 5–27; "Recent Historiography of the First World War (Part II)", (May 2014) 12#2 pp. 155–174
    Mulligan, William. "The Trial Continues: New Directions in the Study of the Origins of the First World War". English Historical Review (2014) 129#538 pp. 639–666.
    Reynolds, David. The Long Shadow: The Legacies of the Great War in the Twentieth Century (2014) Excerpt and text search
    Sanborn, Joshua. "Russian Historiography on the Origins of the First World War Since the Fischer Controversy". Journal of Contemporary History (2013) 48#2 pp. 350–362.
    Sharp, Heather. "Representing Australia's Involvement in the First World War: Discrepancies between Public Discourses and School History Textbooks from 1916 to 1936". Journal of Educational Media, Memory, and Society (2014) 6#1 pp. 1–23.
    Trout, Stephen. "On the Battlefield of Memory: The First World War and American Remembrance, 1919–1941 (2013)
    Turan, Ömer. "Turkish Historiography of the First World War". Middle East Critique (2014) 23#2 pp. 241–257.
    Winter, Jay, ed. The Cambridge History of the First World War (2 vol. Cambridge University Press, 2014)

External links 
Listen to this article (3 parts) · (info)
Part 1 • Part 2 • Part 3
This audio file was created from a revision of the article "World War I " dated 2006-06-24 , and does not reflect subsequent edits to the article. (Audio help)
More spoken articles
World War Iat Wikipedia's sister projects 

     Definitions from Wiktionary 
     Media from Wikimedia Commons 
     News from Wikinews 
     Quotations from Wikiquote 
     Texts from Wikisource 
     Textbooks from Wikibooks 
     Travel guide from Wikivoyage 
     Resources from Wikiversity 

    1914–1918-online International Encyclopedia of the First World War
    The Heritage of the Great War / First World War. Graphic color photos, pictures and music
    A multimedia history of World War I
    European Newspapers from the start of the First World War and the end of the war
    Powerpoint summary of the war
    The World War I Document Archive Wiki, Brigham Young University
    Maps of Europe[permanent dead link ]  covering the history of World War I at omniatlas.com
    Maps of Africa covering the history of World War I in Africa at omniatlas.com
    "World War I Crossroads" current discussions by scholars
    World War I (First World War) Guide to websites
    Documents from Mount Holyoke College
    EFG1914 – Film digitisation project on First World War
    WWI Films on the European Film Gateway
    The British Pathé WW1 Film Archive
    World War I British press photograph collection – A sampling of images distributed by the British government during the war to diplomats overseas, from the UBC Library Digital Collections
    Personal accounts of American World War I veterans, Veterans History Project, Library of Congress.

Animated maps 

    "Europe plunges into war"
    Europe at the end of the war

Library guides 

    National Library of New Zealand
    State Library of New South Wales
    US Library of Congress
    Indiana University Bloomington
    New York University
    University of Alberta

    v
    t
    e

World War I

    Home fronts

Theatres
European

    Balkans
        Serbian Campaign
    Western Front
    Eastern Front
    Italian Front

Middle Eastern

    Gallipoli
    Sinai and Palestine
    Caucasus
    Persia
    Mesopotamia
    South Arabia

African

    South West
    East
    Kamerun
    Togoland
    North

Asian and Pacific

    Tsingtao
    German Samoa
    German New Guinea

At sea

    North Atlantic U-boat campaign
    Mediterranean
    North Sea
    Baltic

    Indian, Pacific and South Atlantic Oceans
        Papeete
        Madras
        Penang
        Cocos
        Coronel
        Falkland Islands
        Más a Tierra

Principal
participants
Entente powers

    Belgium
    Brazil
    China
    France
        French Empire
    Greece
    Italy
    Japan
    Montenegro
    Portuguese Empire
    Romania
    Russia
        Russian Empire
        Russian Republic
    Serbia
    United Kingdom
        British Empire
    United States

Central Powers

    Germany
    Austria-Hungary
    Ottoman Empire
    Bulgaria

Timeline
Pre-War conflicts

    Scramble for Africa (1880–1914)
    Russo-Japanese War (1905)
    First Moroccan (Tangier) Crisis (1905–06)
    Agadir Crisis (1911)
    Italo-Turkish War (1911–12)
    French conquest of Morocco (1911–12)
    First Balkan War (1912–13)
    Second Balkan War (1913)

Prelude

    Origins
    Sarajevo assassination
    Anti-Serb riots in Sarajevo
    July Crisis

Autumn 1914

    Battle of the Frontiers
    Battle of Cer
    First Battle of the Marne
    Siege of Tsingtao
    Battle of Tannenberg
    Battle of Galicia
    Battle of the Masurian Lakes
    Battle of Kolubara
    Battle of Sarikamish
    Race to the Sea
    First Battle of Ypres

1915

    Second Battle of the Masurian Lakes
    Second Battle of Ypres
    Battle of Gallipoli
    Second Battle of Artois
    Battles of the Isonzo
    Gorlice–Tarnów Offensive
    Great Retreat
    Second Battle of Champagne
    Kosovo Offensive
    Siege of Kut
    Battle of Loos

1916

    Erzurum Offensive
    Battle of Verdun
    Lake Naroch Offensive
    Battle of Asiago
    Battle of Jutland
    Battle of the Somme
        first day
    Brusilov Offensive
    Baranovichi Offensive
    Battle of Romani
    Monastir Offensive
    Battle of Transylvania

1917

    Capture of Baghdad
    First Battle of Gaza
    Zimmermann Telegram
    Second Battle of Arras
    Second Battle of the Aisne
    Kerensky Offensive
    Third Battle of Ypres (Passchendaele)
    Battle of Mărășești
    Battle of Caporetto
    First Battle of Monte Grappa
    Southern Palestine Offensive
    Battle of Cambrai
    Armistice of Erzincan

1918

    Operation Faustschlag
    Treaty of Brest-Litovsk
    Spring Offensive
    Battle of Goychay
    Battle of Aghsu
    Second Battle of the Piave River
    Second Battle of the Marne
    Battle of Baku
    Hundred Days Offensive
    Vardar Offensive
    Battle of Megiddo
    Third Transjordan attack
    Meuse-Argonne Offensive
    Battle of Vittorio Veneto
    Battle of Aleppo
    Armistice of Salonica
    Armistice of Mudros
    Armistice of Villa Giusti
    Armistice with Germany

Other conflicts

    Mexican Revolution (1910–20)
    Somaliland Campaign (1910–20)
    Libyan resistance movement (1911–43)
    Maritz Rebellion (1914–15)
    Zaian War (1914–21)
    Indo-German Conspiracy (1914–19)
    Senussi Campaign (1915–16)
    Volta-Bani War (1915–17)
    Easter Rising (1916)
    Anglo-Egyptian Darfur Expedition (1916)
    Kaocen Revolt (1916–17)
    Central Asian Revolt (1916-17)
    Russian Revolution (1917)
    Finnish Civil War (1918)

Post-War conflicts

    Russian Civil War (1917–21)
    Ukrainian–Soviet War (1917–21)
    Armenian–Azerbaijani War (1918–20)
    Georgian–Armenian War (1918)
    German Revolution (1918–19)
    Revolutions and interventions in Hungary (1918–20)
    Hungarian–Romanian War (1918–19)
    Greater Poland Uprising (1918–19)
    Estonian War of Independence (1918–20)
    Latvian War of Independence (1918–20)
    Lithuanian Wars of Independence (1918–20)
    Third Anglo-Afghan War (1919)
    Egyptian Revolution (1919)
    Polish–Ukrainian War (1918–19)
    Polish–Soviet War (1919–21)
    Irish War of Independence (1919–21)
    Turkish War of Independence
        Greco-Turkish War (1919–22)
        Turkish–Armenian War (1920)
    Iraqi revolt (1920)
    Polish–Lithuanian War (1920)
    Vlora War (1920)
    Franco-Syrian War (1920)
    Soviet–Georgian War (1921)
    Irish Civil War (1922–23)

Aspects
Opposition

    Pacifism
    Anti-war movement

Deployment

    Schlieffen Plan (German)
    Plan XVII (French)

Warfare

    Military engagements
    Naval warfare
    Convoy system
    Air warfare
    Cryptography
        Room 40
    Horse use
    Poison gas
    Railways
    Strategic bombing
    Technology
    Trench warfare
    Total war
    Christmas truce
    Last surviving veterans

Civilian impact
Atrocities
Prisoners

    Casualties
    Economic history
    1918 flu pandemic
    Destruction of Kalisz
    Rape of Belgium
    German occupation of Belgium
    German occupation of Luxembourg
    German occupation of northeastern France
    Ober Ost
    Ottoman people
        Armenian Genocide
        Assyrian genocide
        Pontic Greek genocide
    Urkun (Kyrgyzstan)
    Blockade of Germany
    Women
        Australia
    Popular culture
    German prisoners of war in the United States

Agreements

    Partition of the Ottoman Empire
    Sykes–Picot Agreement
    Agreement of Saint-Jean-de-Maurienne
    French-Armenian Agreement
    Damascus Protocol
    Paris Peace Conference
    Venizelos–Tittoni agreement

Treaties

    Treaty of Brest-Litovsk
    Treaty of Lausanne
    Treaty of London
    Treaty of Neuilly
    Treaty of St. Germain
    Treaty of Sèvres
    Treaty of Trianon
    Treaty of Versailles

Consequences

    Aftermath
    "Fourteen Points"
    League of Nations
    World War I memorials
    In popular culture
    Centenary
        outbreak

    Category
    Portal

    v
    t
    e

History of World War I by region and country
Africa

    Angola
    East Africa
    Egypt
    Liberia
    Morocco
    South Africa
    South West Africa
    Southern Rhodesia

North America

    Canada
    United States

South America

    Brazil

Asia

    Caucasus
    India
    Iran
    Iraq
    Japan
    Levant
    Siam
    Vietnam
    Yemen

Europe

    Austria-Hungary
    Belgium
    Bulgaria
    Croatia
    Estonia
    France
    Germany
    Greece
    Hungary
    Ireland
    Italy
    Luxembourg
    Netherlands
    Poland
    Ottoman Empire
    Portugal
    Romania
    Russia
    Serbia
    Spain
    Sweden
    Switzerland
    Ukraine
    United Kingdom

Oceania

    Australia
    New Zealand

Authority control [Image: Edit this at Wikidata]  

    BNF: cb11939093g (data)  
    GND: 4079163-4  
    LCCN: sh85148236  
    NARA: 10646525  
    NDL: 00570522  

Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=World_War_I&oldid=908552682"
Categories:

    Spoken articles
    World Wars
    World War I
    Modern history of Italy
    French Third Republic
    Global conflicts
    History of Austria-Hungary
    1910s in Serbia
    History of the United States (1865–1918)
    Russo-Turkish wars
    Wars involving Armenia
    Wars involving Australia
    Wars involving Azerbaijan
    Wars involving Belgium
    Wars involving Brazil
    Wars involving British India
    Wars involving Bulgaria
    Wars involving Canada
    Wars involving Costa Rica
    Wars involving Cuba
    Wars involving France
    Wars involving Germany
    Wars involving Greece
    Wars involving Guatemala
    Wars involving Haiti
    Wars involving Honduras
    Wars involving Ireland
    Wars involving Italy
    Wars involving Japan
    Wars involving Korea
    Wars involving Liberia
    Wars involving Malta
    Wars involving Montenegro
    Wars involving Nepal
    Wars involving New Zealand
    Wars involving Nicaragua
    Wars involving Panama
    Wars involving Portugal
    Wars involving Rhodesia
    Wars involving Romania
    Wars involving Russia
    Wars involving Serbia
    Wars involving South Africa
    Wars involving Sri Lanka
    Wars involving Sudan
    Wars involving Taiwan
    Wars involving Thailand
    Wars involving the Habsburg Monarchy
    Wars involving the Ottoman Empire
    Wars involving the Republic of China
    Wars involving the states and peoples of Oceania
    Wars involving the United Kingdom
    Wars involving the United States

Hidden categories:

    CS1: Julian–Gregorian uncertainty
    CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list
    CS1 German-language sources (de)
    CS1 Russian-language sources (ru)
    CS1: long volume value
    CS1 Italian-language sources (it)
    CS1 French-language sources (fr)
    Webarchive template wayback links
    CS1 Spanish-language sources (es)
    Webarchive template archiveis links
    Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages
    Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages
    Articles with short description
    Use dmy dates from February 2019
    Use British English from July 2014
    All articles with unsourced statements
    Articles with unsourced statements from November 2018
    All accuracy disputes
    Articles with disputed statements from January 2019
    Articles with disputed statements from November 2018
    Articles with unsourced statements from March 2016
    All articles lacking reliable references
    Articles lacking reliable references from June 2018
    Articles lacking reliable references from May 2018
    All articles with broken links to citations
    Articles containing Spanish-language text
    Articles with unsourced quotes
    Articles with limited geographic scope from June 2017
    Pages in non-existent country centric categories
    Pages with DOIs inactive as of 2019
    All articles with dead external links
    Articles with dead external links from May 2019
    Articles with permanently dead external links
    Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with NARA identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers
    Articles containing video clips

Navigation menu
Personal tools

    Not logged in
    Talk
    Contributions
    Create account
    Log in

Namespaces

    Article 
    Talk 

Variants 

Views

    Read 
    View source 
    View history 

More 

Search
Navigation

    Main page
    Contents
    Featured content
    Current events
    Random article
    Donate to Wikipedia
    Wikipedia store

Interaction

    Help
    About Wikipedia
    Community portal
    Recent changes
    Contact page

Tools

    What links here
    Related changes
    Upload file
    Special pages
    Permanent link
    Page information
    Wikidata item
    Cite this page

In other projects

    Wikimedia Commons
    Wikibooks
    Wikinews
    Wikiquote
    Wikiversity
    Wikivoyage

Print/export

    Create a book
    Download as PDF
    Printable version

Languages

    Адыгэбзэ
    Afrikaans
    Alemannisch
    አማርኛ
    Ænglisc
    العربية
    Aragonés
    Armãneashti
    অসমীয়া
    Asturianu
    Avañe'ẽ
    Azərbaycanca
    تۆرکجه
    Bamanankan
    বাংলা
    B'n-l'm-gú
    Башҡортса
    Беларуская
    Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎
    भोजपुरी
    Bikol Central
    Български
    Boarisch
    བོད་ཡིག
    Bosanski
    Brezhoneg
    Буряад
    Català
    Чӑвашла
    Čeština
    Chi-Chewa
    ChiShona
    Corsu
    Cymraeg
    Dansk
    Deutsch
    Dolnoserbski
    डोटेली
    Eesti
    Ελληνικά
    Emiliàn e rumagnòl
    Español
    Esperanto
    Estremeñu
    Euskara
    فارسی
    Fiji Hindi
    Føroyskt
    Français
    Frysk
    Furlan
    Gaeilge
    Gaelg
    Gàidhlig
    Galego
    贛語
    ગુજરાતી
    客家語/Hak-k'-ngî
    한국어
    Hausa
    Հայերեն
    Արեւմտահայերէն
    हिन्दी
    Hornjoserbsce
    Hrvatski
    Ido
    Ilokano
    Bahasa Indonesia
    Interlingua
    Ирон
    Íslenska
    Italiano
    עברית
    Jawa
    Kabɩyɛ
    ಕನ್ನಡ
    Къарачай-малкъар
    ქართული
    Қазақша
    Kiswahili
    Коми
    Kreyòl ayisyen
    Kurdî
    Кыргызча
    Ladino
    Latina
    Latviešu
    Lëtzebuergesch
    Лезги
    Lietuvių
    Ligure
    Limburgs
    Lumbaart
    Magyar
    मैथिली
    Македонски
    Malagasy
    മലയാളം
    Malti
    मराठी
    მარგალური
    مصرى
    مازِرونی
    Bahasa Melayu
    Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄
    Mirandés
    Монгол
    မြန်မာဘာသာ
    Nāhuatl
    Dorerin Naoero
    Nederlands
    Nedersaksies
    नेपाली
    नेपाल भाषा
    日本語
    Napulitano
    Нохчийн
    Nordfriisk
    Norsk
    Norsk nynorsk
    Nouormand
    Occitan
    ଓଡ଼ିଆ
    Oromoo
    Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча
    ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
    پنجابی
    Papiamentu
    پښتو
    Patois
    ភាសាខ្មែរ
    Picard
    Piemontèis
    Plattdüütsch
    Polski
    Português
    Qırımtatarca
    Rom'nă
    Romani čhib
    Rumantsch
    Runa Simi
    Русиньскый
    Русский
    Саха тыла
    ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ
    Sardu
    Scots
    Seeltersk
    Shqip
    Sicilianu
    සිංහල
    Simple English
    سنڌي
    Slovenčina
    Slovenščina
    Soomaaliga
    کوردی
    Српски / srpski
    Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
    Basa Sunda
    Suomi
    Svenska
    Tagalog
    தமிழ்
    Татарча/tatarça
    తెలుగు
    ไทย
    Türkçe
    Türkmençe
    Українська
    اردو
    ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche
    Vèneto
    Vepsän kel’
    Tiếng Việt
    Volapük
    Võro
    Walon
    文言
    West-Vlams
    Winaray
    Wolof
    吴语
    ייִדיש
    Yorùbá
    粵語
    Zazaki
    Zeêuws
    Žemaitėška
    中文

Edit links 

    This page was last edited on 30 July 2019, at 13:03 (UTC) .
    Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

    Privacy policy
    About Wikipedia
    Disclaimers
    Contact Wikipedia
    Developers
    Cookie statement
    Mobile view

    [Image: Wikimedia Foundation]  	
    [Image: Powered by MediaWiki]  	



Textise: Back to top
This text-only page was created by Textise (www.textise.net) © Textise - CPC LLC
To find out more about our product, visit Textise.org.


-------------------------------------------------



Are you a webmaster? Find out how to easily add Textise to your web site.

This page has been Textised!
The original page address was https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hundred_Years'_War
For sharing use http://tinyurl.com/y5tnetrq

Here are some options:

- Back to original page (in this window | in a new window)
- Convert this page to a PDF
- Print this page
- Textise Home Page (full version | text only version)
- Textise Options Page (choose font size, font colour, etc.)

Are you a webmaster? Find out how to easily add Textise to your web site.

Hundred Years' War
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation Jump to search
For the earlier Anglo–French dispute, see Capetian–Plantagenet rivalry.

Hundred Years' WarPart of the Anglo-French Wars[Image: Hundred years war collage.jpg]  
Clockwise, from top left: The Battle of La Rochelle, 
The Battle of Agincourt,
The Battle of Patay,
Joan of Arc at the Siege of OrléansDate24 May 1337 – 19 October 1453[c]
(116 years, 4 months, 3 weeks and 4 days)Location
France, the Low Countries, Great Britain, Iberian Peninsula
Result

    Victory of House of Valois and its allies
    • House of Valois retains the French throne; English and French monarchies remain separate
    • Agnatic primogeniture confirmed as the law of French royal succession
    • Strengthening of the French monarchy
    • House of Plantagenet is weakened, leading to the Wars of the Roses
    • Rise of nationalistic identities in England and France
    • English claims to the French throne de facto abandoned
    • Decline of chivalry
    • Decline of feudalism

Territorial
changes England permanently loses all of its previous continental possessions but gains the Pale of Calais.Belligerents

    [Image: Arms of France (France Moderne).svg]   France loyal to the House of Valois
    [Image: Royal Arms of the Kingdom of Scotland.svg]   Kingdom of Scotland
    [Image: Royal Coat of Arms of the Crown of Castile (1284-1390).svg]   Crown of Castile
    [Image: Lombard League arms.svg]   Republic of Genoa
    [Image: Lesser coat of arms of the Kingdom of Bohemia (Wenceslaus II of Bohemia).svg]   Kingdom of Bohemia
    [Image: Royal arms of Aragon.svg]   Crown of Aragon
    [Image: BlasonComtatVenaissin.svg]   Avignon Papacy[a]

    [Image: Royal Arms of England (1399-1603).svg]   France loyal to the House of Plantagenet
    [Image: Royal Arms of England (1399-1603).svg]   Kingdom of England
    [Image: Brasão de armas do reino de Portugal (1385).svg]   Kingdom of Portugal
    [Image: Evolution Coat of Arms of Navarre-3.svg]   Kingdom of Navarre
    [Image: CoA Pontifical States 02.svg]   Papal States[b]

Commanders and leaders

    [Image: Arms of the Kings of France (France Ancien).svg]   Philip VI (1337–1350) 
    [Image: Arms of the Kings of France (France Ancien).svg]   John II (1350–1364) 
    [Image: Arms of France (France Moderne).svg]   Charles V (1364–1380) 
    [Image: Arms of France (France Moderne).svg]   Charles VI (1380–1422) 
    [Image: Arms of France (France Moderne).svg]   Charles VII (1422–1453) 

    [Image: Royal Arms of England (1340-1367).svg]   Edward III (1337–1377) 
    [Image: Royal Arms of England (1340-1367).svg]   Richard II (1377–1399) 
    [Image: Royal Arms of England (1399-1603).svg]   Henry IV (1399–1413) 
    [Image: Royal Arms of England (1399-1603).svg]   Henry V (1413–1422) 
    [Image: Royal Arms of England (1399-1603).svg]   Henry VI (1422–1453) 

    v
    t
    e

Hundred Years' War
Edwardian phase (1337–1360)  
Cadzand
Arnemuiden
English Channel
Thiérache campaign

    Cambrai

Scheldt campaigns
Sluys
Tournaisis campaign

    Saint-Omer
    Tournai

Gascony

    Bergerac
    Auberoche

Aiguillon
Crécy campaign

    Caen
    Blanchetaque
    Crécy
    Calais (1346–1347)

Lancaster's chevauchée of 1346
Neville's Cross
Lunalonge
Calais (1349)
Winchelsea
Saint-Jean-d'Angély
Saintes
Ardres
Black Prince's chevauchée of 1355
Burnt Candlemas
Black Prince's chevauchée of 1356
Poitiers
Jacquerie
Reims Campaign
Chartres

    v
    t
    e

War of the Breton Succession  

    Champtoceaux
    Vannes
    Hennebont
    Brest
    Morlaix
    Cadoret
    Saint-Pol-de-Léon
    La Roche-Derrien
    The Thirty
    Mauron
    Montmuran
    Rennes
    Auray

    v
    t
    e

Hundred Years' War
Caroline phase (1369–89)  

    Cocherel
    Limoges
    Pontvallain
    La Rochelle
    Chiset
    Roosebeke
    Margate

    v
    t
    e

Hundred Years' War
Lancastrian phase (1415–53)  

    Harfleur
    Agincourt
    Valmont
    Rouen
    2nd La Rochelle
    Baugé
    Meaux
    Cravant
    La Brossinière
    Verneuil
    St. James
    Orléans
    Herrings
    Loire
    Jargeau
    Meung-sur-Loire
    Beaugency
    Patay
    Reims
    Paris
    La Charité
    Compiègne
    Gerberoy
    St. Denis
    Calais
    Tartas
    Formigny
    Castillon

    v
    t
    e

Hundred Years' War  

    Edwardian phase
    War of the Breton Succession
    War of the Two Peters
    Castilian Civil War
    Caroline phase
    Despenser's Crusade
    1383–1385 Crisis
    Lancastrian phase
    Armagnac–Burgundian conflict

    v
    t
    e

Anglo-French wars  

    1202–04
    1213–14
    1215–17
    1242–43
    1294–1303
    1324
    1337–1453 (1337–60, 1369–89, 1415–53)
    1496-98
    1512–14
    1522–26
    1542–46
    1557–1559
    1627–29
    1666–67
    1667-68
    1689–97
    1702–13
    1744–48
    1744–1763
    1754–63
    1778–83
    1793–1802
    1803–14
    1815

The Hundred Years' War was a series of conflicts waged from 1337 to 1453 by the House of Plantagenet, rulers of the Kingdom of England, against the French House of Valois, over the right to rule the Kingdom of France. Each side drew many allies into the war. It was one of the most notable conflicts of the Middle Ages, in which five generations of kings from two rival dynasties fought for the throne of the largest kingdom in Western Europe. The war marked both the height of chivalry and its subsequent decline, and the development of strong national identities in both countries.

Tensions between the crowns of France and England can be traced back to the origins of the English royal family itself, which was French (Norman, and later, Angevin) in origin. For this reason, English monarchs had historically held not only the English crown, but also titles and lands within France, the possession of which made them vassals to the kings of France. The status of the English king's French fiefs was a major source of conflict between the two monarchies throughout the Middle Ages. French monarchs systematically sought to check the growth of English power, stripping away lands as the opportunity arose, particularly whenever England was at war with Scotland, an ally of France. Over the centuries, English holdings in France had varied in size, at some points dwarfing even the French royal domain; by 1337, however, only Gascony was left to the English.

In 1316, a principle was established denying women succession to the French throne (later retroactively attributed to the ancient Salic law). In 1328, Charles IV of France died without sons or brothers. His closest male relative was his nephew Edward III of England, whose mother, Isabella of France, was sister of the deceased king. Isabella claimed the throne of France for her son, but the French rejected it, maintaining that Isabella could not transmit a right she did not possess. Furthermore, political sentiment favoured a Frenchman for the crown rather than a foreign prince. The throne passed instead to Philip, Count of Valois, a patrilineal cousin of Charles IV, who would become Philip VI of France, the first king of the House of Valois. The English had not expected their claim to meet with success, and did not press the matter when it was denied. However, disagreements between Philip and Edward induced the former to confiscate the latter's lands in France, and in turn prompted Edward III to reassert his claim to the French throne.

Several overwhelming English victories in the war—especially at Crécy, Poitiers, and Agincourt—raised the prospects of an ultimate English triumph, and convinced the English to continue pouring money and manpower into the war over many decades. However, the greater resources of the French monarchy prevented the English kings from ever completing the conquest of France. Starting in 1429, decisive French victories at Orléans, Patay, Formigny, and Castillon concluded the war in favour of the House of Valois, with England permanently losing most of its possessions on the continent.

Historians commonly divide the war into three phases separated by truces: the Edwardian War (1337–1360), the Caroline War (1369–1389), and the Lancastrian War (1415–1453). Local conflicts in neighbouring areas, which were contemporarily related to the war, including the War of the Breton Succession (1341–1365), the Castilian Civil War (1366–1369), the War of the Two Peters (1356–1369) in Aragon, and the 1383–85 crisis in Portugal, were availed by the parties to advance their agendas. Later historians adopted the term "Hundred Years' War" as a historiographical periodisation to encompass all of these events, thus constructing the longest military conflict in European history.

The war owes its historical significance to multiple factors. By its end, feudal armies had been largely replaced by professional troops, and aristocratic dominance had yielded to a democratisation of the manpower and weapons of armies. Although primarily a dynastic conflict, the war gave impetus to ideas of French and English nationalism. The wider introduction of weapons and tactics supplanted the feudal armies where heavy cavalry had dominated, and artillery became important. The war precipitated the creation of the first standing armies in Western Europe since the time of the Western Roman Empire, thus helping to change their role in warfare. With respect to the belligerents, in France, civil wars, deadly epidemics, famines, and bandit free-companies of mercenaries reduced the population drastically. In England, political forces over time came to oppose the costly venture. The dissatisfaction of English nobles, resulting from the loss of their continental landholdings, as well as the general shock at losing a war in which investment had been so great, became factors leading to the Wars of the Roses (1455–1487).

Contents 

    1  Origin of the conflict 
        1.1  Dynastic turmoil in France: 1316–1328 
        1.2  The dispute over Guyenne: a problem of sovereignty 
        1.3  Gascony under the King of England 
        1.4  Franco-Scot alliance 
    2  Beginning of the war: 1337–1360 
        2.1  End of homage 
        2.2  Outbreak, the English Channel and Brittany 
        2.3  Battle of Crécy and the taking of Calais 
        2.4  Battle of Poitiers 
        2.5  Reims Campaign and Black Monday 
    3  First peace: 1360–1369 
    4  French ascendancy under Charles V: 1369–1389 
        4.1  Aquitaine and Castile 
        4.2  1373 campaign of John of Gaunt 
        4.3  English turmoil 
            4.3.1  1380 campaign of the Earl of Buckingham 
        4.4  French turmoil 
    5  Second peace: 1389–1415 
    6  Resumption of the war under Henry V: 1415–1429 
        6.1  Burgundian alliance and the seizure of Paris 
            6.1.1  Battle of Agincourt (1415) 
            6.1.2  Treaty of Troyes (1420) 
            6.1.3  Death of Clarence (1421) 
        6.2  English success 
    7  French victory: 1429–1453 
        7.1  Joan of Arc and French revival 
        7.2  Henry's coronations and the desertion of Burgundy 
        7.3  French resurgence 
        7.4  French conquest of Gascony 
        7.5  End of the war 
    8  Significance 
        8.1  Historical significance 
        8.2  Military significance 
    9  Timeline 
        9.1  Battles 
    10  Important figures 
        10.1  France 
        10.2  England 
        10.3  Burgundy 
    11  See also 
    12  Notes 
    13  References 
    14  Further reading 
    15  External links 

Origin of the conflict [ edit]  
The root causes of the conflict can be found in the demographic, economic and political crises of 14th-century Europe. The outbreak of war was motivated by a gradual rise in tension between the kings of France and England about Gascony, Flanders and Scotland. The dynastic question, which arose due to an interruption of the direct male line of the Capetians, was the official pretext.

 Dynastic turmoil in France: 1316–1328 [ edit]  
Main article: English claims to the French throne
The question of female succession to the French throne was raised after the death of Louis X in 1316. Louis X left only a daughter, and his posthumous son John I lived only a few days. Furthermore, the paternity of his daughter was in question, as her mother, Margaret of Burgundy, had been exposed as an adulterer in the Tour de Nesle affair. Philip, Count of Poitiers, brother of Louis X, positioned himself to take the crown, advancing the stance that women should be ineligible to succeed to the French throne. Through his political sagacity he won over his adversaries and succeeded to the French throne as Philip V. By the same law that he procured, his daughters were denied the succession, which passed to his younger brother, Charles IV, in 1322.[1]

Philip III
[Image: Blason pays fr FranceAncien.svg]   King of France
1270–1285 Louis, Count of Évreux
(1276–1319)Philip IV
[Image: Blason pays fr FranceAncien.svg]   King of France
1285–1314Charles, Count of Valois
(1270–1325) Louis X
[Image: Blason pays fr FranceAncien.svg]   King of France
1314–1316Philip V
[Image: Blason pays fr FranceAncien.svg]   King of France 
1316–1322Charles IV
[Image: Blason pays fr FranceAncien.svg]   King of France 
1322–1328IsabellaEdward II
[Image: Royal Arms of England.svg]   King of EnglandPhilip VI
[Image: Blason pays fr FranceAncien.svg]   King of France
1328–1350 Philip, Count of ÉvreuxJoan II of NavarreJoan of Burgundy
(born 1308)Edward III
[Image: Royal Arms of England.svg]   King of England
(born 1312) Charles II
[Image: Royal Arms of Navarre (1328-1425).svg]   King of Navarre
(born 1332)Philip of Burgundy
(born 1323)
Charles IV died in 1328, leaving a daughter and a pregnant wife. If the unborn child was male, he would become king; if not, Charles left the choice of his successor to the nobles. A girl ended up being born, therefore rendering the main male line of the House of Capet extinct.

By proximity of blood, the nearest male relative of Charles IV was his nephew, Edward III of England. Edward was the son of Isabella, the sister of the dead Charles IV, but the question arose whether she should be able to transmit a right to inherit that she did not herself possess. The French nobility, moreover, balked at the prospect of being ruled by Isabelle and her lover Roger Mortimer, who were widely suspected of having murdered the previous English king, Edward II. The assemblies of the French barons and prelates and the University of Paris decided that males who derive their right to inheritance through their mother should be excluded. Thus the nearest heir through male ancestry was Charles IV's first cousin, Philip, Count of Valois, and it was decided that he should be crowned Philip VI. In 1340 the Avignon papacy confirmed that under Salic law males should not be able to inherit through their mothers.[1][2]

Eventually, Edward III reluctantly recognized Philip VI and paid him homage for his French fiefs. He made concessions in Guyenne, but reserved the right to reclaim territories arbitrarily confiscated. After that, he expected to be left undisturbed while he made war on Scotland.

The dispute over Guyenne: a problem of sovereignty [ edit]  
Main article: Capetian-Plantagenet rivalry
Further information: Peerage of France
Homage of Edward I of England (kneeling) to Philip IV of France (seated), 1286. As Duke of Aquitaine, Edward was also a vassal to the French King. Illumination by Jean Fouquet from the Grandes Chroniques de France in the Bibliothèque Nationale de France, Paris.
Tensions between the French and English monarchies can be traced back to the 1066 Norman conquest of England, in which the English throne was seized by the Duke of Normandy, a vassal of the King of France. As a result, the crown of England was held by a succession of nobles who already owned lands in France, which put them among the most powerful subjects of the French King, as they could now draw upon the economic power of England to enforce their interests in the mainland. To the kings of France, this dangerously threatened their royal authority, and so they would constantly try to undermine English rule in France, while the English monarchs would struggle to protect and expand their lands. This clash of interests was the root cause of much of the conflict between the French and English monarchies throughout the medieval era.

The Anglo-Norman dynasty that had ruled England since the Norman conquest of 1066 was brought to an end when Henry, the son of Geoffrey of Anjou and Empress Matilda and great-grandson of William the Conqueror, became the first of the Angevin kings of England in 1154 as Henry II.[3] The Angevin kings directly ruled over more French territory than the kings of France. However, they still owed homage for these territories to the French king. From the 11th century onward, the Angevins had autonomy within their French domains, effectively neutralising the issue.[4]

King John of England inherited the Angevin domains from his brother Richard I. However, Philip II of France acted decisively to exploit the weaknesses of John, both legally and militarily, and by 1204 had succeeded in taking control of much of the Angevin continental possessions. Following John's reign, the Battle of Bouvines (1214), the Saintonge War (1242), and finally the War of Saint-Sardos (1324), the English king's holdings on the continent, as Duke of Aquitaine (Guyenne), were limited roughly to provinces in Gascony.[5]

The dispute over Guyenne is even more important than the dynastic question in explaining the outbreak of the war. Guyenne posed a significant problem to the kings of France and England: Edward III was a vassal of Philip VI of France because of his French possessions and was required to recognise the suzerainty of the King of France over them. In practical terms, a judgment in Guyenne might be subject to an appeal to the French royal court. The King of France had the power to revoke all legal decisions made by the King of England in Aquitaine, which was unacceptable to the English. Therefore, sovereignty over Guyenne was a latent conflict between the two monarchies for several generations.

During the War of Saint-Sardos, Charles of Valois, father of Philip VI, invaded Aquitaine on behalf of Charles IV and conquered the duchy after a local insurrection, which the French believed had been incited by Edward II of England. Charles IV grudgingly agreed to return this territory in 1325. To recover his duchy, Edward II had to compromise: he sent his son, the future Edward III, to pay homage.

The King of France agreed to restore Guyenne, minus Agen. But the French delayed the return of the lands, which helped Philip VI. On 6 June 1329, Edward III finally paid homage to the King of France. However, at the ceremony, Philip VI had it recorded that the homage was not due to the fiefs detached from the duchy of Guyenne by Charles IV (especially Agen). For Edward, the homage did not imply the renunciation of his claim to the extorted lands.

Gascony under the King of England [ edit]  
France in 1330.
   France before 1214
   French acquisitions until 1330
   England and Guyenne/Gascony as of 1330
In the 11th century, Gascony in southwest France had been incorporated into Aquitaine (also known as Guyenne or Guienne) and formed with it the province of Guyenne and Gascony (French: Guyenne-et-Gascogne). The Angevin kings of England became Dukes of Aquitaine after Henry II married the former Queen of France, Eleanor of Aquitaine, in 1152, from which point the lands were held in vassalage to the French Crown. By the 13th century the terms Aquitaine, Guyenne and Gascony were virtually synonymous.[6][7] At the beginning of Edward III's reign on 1 February 1327, the only part of Aquitaine that remained in his hands was the Duchy of Gascony. The term Gascony came to be used for the territory held by the Angevin (Plantagenet) Kings of England in south-west France, although they still used the title Duke of Aquitaine.[7][8]

For the first 10 years of Edward III's reign, Gascony had been a major point of friction. The English argued that, as Charles IV had not acted in a proper way towards his tenant, Edward should be able to hold the duchy free of any French suzerainty. This argument was rejected by the French, so in 1329, the 17-year-old Edward III paid homage to Philip VI. Tradition demanded that vassals approach their liege unarmed with heads bare. Edward protested by attending the ceremony wearing his crown and sword.[9] Even after this pledge of homage, the French continued to pressure the English administration.[10]

Gascony was not the only sore point. One of Edward's influential advisers was Robert III of Artois. Robert was an exile from the French court, having fallen out with Philip VI over an inheritance claim. He urged Edward to start a war to reclaim France, and was able to provide extensive intelligence on the French court.[11]

Franco-Scot alliance [ edit]  
See also: Auld Alliance
France was an ally of the Kingdom of Scotland as English kings had for some time tried to subjugate the area. In 1295, a treaty was signed between France and Scotland during the reign of Philip the Fair. Charles IV formally renewed the treaty in 1326, promising Scotland that France would support the Scots if England invaded their country. Similarly, France would have Scotland's support if its own kingdom was attacked. Edward could not succeed in his plans for Scotland if the Scots could count on French support.[12]

Philip VI had assembled a large naval fleet off Marseilles as part of an ambitious plan for a crusade to the Holy Land. However, the plan was abandoned and the fleet, including elements of the Scottish navy, moved to the English Channel off Normandy in 1336, threatening England.[11] To deal with this crisis, Edward proposed that the English raise two armies, one to deal with the Scots "at a suitable time", the other to proceed at once to Gascony. At the same time, ambassadors were to be sent to France with a proposed treaty for the French king.[13]

 Beginning of the war: 1337–1360 [ edit]  

    v
    t
    e

Hundred Years' War
Edwardian phase (1337–1360)  

    Cadzand
    Arnemuiden
    English Channel
    Thiérache campaign
        Cambrai
    Scheldt campaigns
    Sluys
    Tournaisis campaign
        Saint-Omer
        Tournai
    Gascony
        Bergerac
        Auberoche
    Aiguillon
    Crécy campaign
        Caen
        Blanchetaque
        Crécy
        Calais (1346–1347)
    Lancaster's chevauchée of 1346
    Neville's Cross
    Lunalonge
    Calais (1349)
    Winchelsea
    Saint-Jean-d'Angély
    Saintes
    Ardres
    Black Prince's chevauchée of 1355
    Burnt Candlemas
    Black Prince's chevauchée of 1356
    Poitiers
    Jacquerie
    Reims Campaign
    Chartres

Main article: Hundred Years' War (1337–1360)
End of homage [ edit]  
At the end of April 1337, Philip of France was invited to meet the delegation from England but refused. The arrière-ban, literally a call to arms, was proclaimed throughout France starting on 30 April 1337. Then, in May 1337, Philip met with his Great Council in Paris. It was agreed that the Duchy of Aquitaine, effectively Gascony, should be taken back into the king's hands on the grounds that Edward III was in breach of his obligations as vassal and had sheltered the king's 'mortal enemy' Robert d'Artois.[14] Edward responded to the confiscation of Aquitaine by challenging Philip's right to the French throne. When Charles IV died, Edward had made a claim for the succession of the French throne, through the right of his mother Isabella (Charles IV's sister), daughter of Philip IV. Any claim was considered invalidated by Edward's homage to Philip VI in 1329. Edward revived his claim and in 1340 formally assumed the title 'King of France and the French Royal Arms'.[15]

On 26 January 1340, Edward III formally received homage from Guy, half-brother of the Count of Flanders. The civic authorities of Ghent, Ypres and Bruges proclaimed Edward King of France. Edward's purpose was to strengthen his alliances with the Low Countries. His supporters would be able to claim that they were loyal to the "true" King of France and were not rebels against Philip. In February 1340, Edward returned to England to try to raise more funds and also deal with political difficulties.[16]

Relations with Flanders were also tied to the English wool trade, since Flanders' principal cities relied heavily on textile production and England supplied much of the raw material they needed. Edward III had commanded that his chancellor sit on the woolsack in council as a symbol of the pre-eminence of the wool trade.[17] At the time there were about 110,000 sheep in Sussex alone.[18] The great medieval English monasteries produced large surpluses of wool that were sold to mainland Europe. Successive governments were able to make large amounts of money by taxing it.[17] France's sea power led to economic disruptions for England, shrinking the wool trade to Flanders and the wine trade from Gascony.[19][20]

 Outbreak, the English Channel and Brittany [ edit]  
Battle of Sluys from a BNF manuscript of Froissart's Chronicles, Bruges, c.1470.
On 22 June 1340, Edward and his fleet sailed from England and arrived off the Zwin estuary the next day. The French fleet assumed a defensive formation off the port of Sluis. The English fleet deceived the French into believing they were withdrawing. When the wind turned in the late afternoon, the English attacked with the wind and sun behind them. The French fleet was almost completely destroyed in what became known as the Battle of Sluys. England dominated the English Channel for the rest of the war, preventing French invasions.[16] At this point, Edward's funds ran out and the war probably would have ended were it not for the death of the Duke of Brittany precipitating a succession dispute between the duke's half-brother John of Montfort and Charles of Blois, nephew of Philip VI.[21]

In 1341, conflict over the succession to the Duchy of Brittany began the War of the Breton Succession, in which Edward backed John of Montfort and Philip backed Charles of Blois. Action for the next few years focused around a back-and-forth struggle in Brittany. The city of Vannes in Brittany changed hands several times, while further campaigns in Gascony met with mixed success for both sides.[21] The English-backed Montfort finally succeeded in taking the duchy but not until 1364.[22]

 Battle of Crécy and the taking of Calais [ edit]  
Battle of Crécy, 1346, from the Grandes Chroniques de France. British Library, London.
Edward III counting the dead on the battlefield of Crécy
In July 1346, Edward mounted a major invasion across the channel, landing in Normandy's Cotentin, at St. Vaast. The English army captured the completely unguarded Caen in just one day, surprising the French. Philip mustered a large army to oppose Edward, who chose to march northward toward the Low Countries, pillaging as he went. He reached the river Seine to find most of the crossings destroyed. He moved further and further south, worryingly close to Paris, until he found the crossing at Poissy. This had only been partially destroyed, so the carpenters within his army were able to fix it. He then continued on his way to Flanders until he reached the river Somme. The army crossed at a tidal ford at Blanchetaque, leaving Philip's army stranded. Edward, assisted by this head start, continued on his way to Flanders once more, until, finding himself unable to outmanoeuvre Philip, Edward positioned his forces for battle and Philip's army attacked.

The Battle of Crécy was a complete disaster for the French, largely credited to the longbowmen and the French king, who allowed his army to attack before it was ready.[23] Philip appealed to his Scottish allies to help with a diversionary attack on England. King David II of Scotland responded by invading northern England, but his army was defeated and he was captured at the Battle of Neville's Cross, on 17 October 1346. This greatly reduced the threat from Scotland.[21][24] In France, Edward proceeded north unopposed and besieged the city of Calais on the English Channel, capturing it in 1347. This became an important strategic asset for the English, allowing them to keep troops safely in northern France.[23] Calais would remain under English control, even after the end of the Hundred Years' War, until the successful French siege in 1558.[25]

Battle of Poitiers [ edit]  
In 1348, the Black Death, which had just arrived in Paris, began to ravage Europe.[26] In 1355, after the plague had passed and England was able to recover financially,[citation needed ] King Edward's son and namesake, the Prince of Wales, later known as the Black Prince, led a Chevauchée from Gascony into France, during which he pillaged Avignonet and Castelnaudary, sacked Carcassonne, and plundered Narbonne. The next year during another Chevauchée he ravaged Auvergne, Limousin, and Berry but failed to take Bourges. He offered terms of peace to King John II of France (known as John the Good), who had outflanked him near Poitiers, but refused to surrender himself as the price of their acceptance. This led to the Battle of Poitiers (19 September 1356) where his army routed the French.[27] During the battle, the Gascon noble Jean de Grailly, captal de Buch led a mounted unit that was concealed in a forest. The French advance was contained, at which point de Grailly led a flanking movement with his horsemen cutting off the French retreat and succeeding in capturing King John and many of his nobles.[28][29] With John held hostage, his son the Dauphin (later to become Charles V) assumed the powers of the king as regent.[30]

After the Battle of Poitiers, many French nobles and mercenaries rampaged, and chaos ruled. A contemporary report recounted:

... all went ill with the kingdom and the State was undone. Thieves and robbers rose up everywhere in the land. The Nobles despised and hated all others and took no thought for usefulness and profit of lord and men. They subjected and despoiled the peasants and the men of the villages. In no wise did they defend their country from its enemies; rather did they trample it underfoot, robbing and pillaging the peasants' goods ...
From the Chronicles of Jean de Venette[31]

Reims Campaign and Black Monday [ edit]  
Main article: Reims Campaign
Black Monday (1360), hailstorms and lightning ravage the English army at Chartres
Edward invaded France, for the third and last time, hoping to capitalise on the discontent and seize the throne. The Dauphin's strategy was that of non-engagement with the English army in the field. However, Edward wanted the crown and chose the cathedral city of Reims for his coronation (Reims was the traditional coronation city).[32] However, the citizens of Reims built and reinforced the city's defences before Edward and his army arrived.[33] Edward besieged the city for five weeks, but the defences held and there was no coronation.[32] Edward moved on to Paris, but retreated after a few skirmishes in the suburbs. Next was the town of Chartres. Disaster struck in a freak hailstorm on the encamped army, causing over 1,000 English deaths – the so-called Black Monday on Easter 1360. This devastated Edward's army and forced him to negotiate when approached by the French.[34] A conference was held at Brétigny that resulted in the Treaty of Brétigny (8 May 1360).[35] The treaty was ratified at Calais in October. In return for increased lands in Aquitaine, Edward renounced Normandy, Touraine, Anjou and Maine and consented to reduce King John's ransom by a million crowns. Edward also abandoned his claim to the crown of France.[28][30][36]

 First peace: 1360–1369 [ edit]  
The French king, John II, had been held captive in England. The Treaty of Brétigny set his ransom at 3 million crowns and allowed for hostages to be held in lieu of John. The hostages included two of his sons, several princes and nobles, four inhabitants of Paris, and two citizens from each of the nineteen principal towns of France. While these hostages were held, John returned to France to try and raise funds to pay the ransom. In 1362 John's son Louis of Anjou, a hostage in English-held Calais, escaped captivity. So, with his stand-in hostage gone, John felt honour-bound to return to captivity in England.[30][36]

The French crown had been at odds with Navarre (near southern Gascony) since 1354, and in 1363 the Navarrese used the captivity of John II in London and the political weakness of the Dauphin to try to seize power.[37] Although there was no formal treaty, Edward III supported the Navarrese moves, particularly as there was a prospect that he might gain control over the northern and western provinces as a consequence. With this in mind, Edward deliberately slowed the peace negotiations.[38] In 1364, John II died in London, while still in honourable captivity.[39] Charles V succeeded him as king of France.[30][40] On 7 May 1364, one month after the dauphin's accession and three days before his coronation as Charles V, the Navarrese suffered a crushing defeat at the Battle of Cocherel.[41]

 French ascendancy under Charles V: 1369–1389 [ edit]  

    v
    t
    e

Hundred Years' War
Caroline phase (1369–89)  

    Cocherel
    Limoges
    Pontvallain
    La Rochelle
    Chiset
    Roosebeke
    Margate

Main article: Hundred Years' War (1369–1389)
See also: Castilian Civil War
Aquitaine and Castile [ edit]  
Statue of Bertrand du Guesclin in Dinan
The Franco-Castilian Navy, led by Admirals de Vienne and Tovar, managed to raid the English coasts for the first time since the beginning of the Hundred Years' War.
In 1366 there was a civil war of succession in Castile (part of modern Spain). The forces of the ruler Peter of Castile were pitched against those of his half-brother Henry of Trastámara. The English crown supported Peter; the French supported Henry. French forces were led by Bertrand du Guesclin, a Breton, who rose from relatively humble beginnings to prominence as one of France's war leaders. Charles V provided a force of 12,000, with du Guesclin at their head, to support Trastámara in his invasion of Castile.[42]

Peter appealed to England and Aquitaine's Black Prince for help, but none was forthcoming, forcing Peter into exile in Aquitaine. The Black Prince had previously agreed to support Peter's claims but concerns over the terms of the treaty of Brétigny led him to assist Peter as a representative of Aquitaine, rather than England. He then led an Anglo-Gascon army into Castile. Peter was restored to power after Trastámara's army was defeated at the Battle of Nájera.[43]

Although the Castilians had agreed to fund the Black Prince, they failed to do so. The Prince was suffering from ill health and returned with his army to Aquitaine. To pay off debts incurred during the Castile campaign, the prince instituted a hearth tax. Arnaud-Amanieu VIII, Lord of Albret had fought on the Black Prince's side during the war. Albret, who already had become discontented by the influx of English administrators into the enlarged Aquitaine, refused to allow the tax to be collected in his fief. He then joined a group of Gascon lords who appealed to Charles V for support in their refusal to pay the tax. Charles V summoned one Gascon lord and the Black Prince to hear the case in his High Court in Paris. The Black Prince answered that he would go to Paris with sixty thousand men behind him. War broke out again and Edward III resumed the title of King of France.[44] Charles V declared that all the English possessions in France were forfeited, and before the end of 1369 all of Aquitaine was in full revolt.[44][45]

With the Black Prince gone from Castile, Henry de Trastámara led a second invasion that ended with Peter's death at the Battle of Montiel in March 1369. The new Castilian regime provided naval support to French campaigns against Aquitaine and England.[43] In 1372 the Castilian fleet defeated the English fleet in the Battle of La Rochelle.

In 1373, the combined Castilian and French fleets sacked the Isle of Wight. In 1377, they burned Rye and Hastings and sacked Lewes, Folkestone, Portsmouth, Dartmouth, and Plymouth. In 1378, the Castilian galleys raided Cornwall, burning coastal towns and levying tribute.[46] The following year the Castilians conquered the Castle of La Roche Guyon on the Breton coast. In July 1380, Fernando Sánchez de Tovar led a Franco-Castilian fleet from La Rochelle in an attack on Jersey and Guernsey, followed by an August raid into the Thames Estuary. The raiders burned Gravesend, while the Londoners watched the flames from a distance.[47]

1373 campaign of John of Gaunt [ edit]  
In August 1373, John of Gaunt, accompanied by John de Montfort, Duke of Brittany led a force of 9,000 men out from Calais on a major chevauchée. While initially successful as French forces were insufficiently concentrated to oppose them, the English began to meet further resistance as they moved south. French forces began to concentrate around the English force but, under specific orders from King Charles V, the French avoided a set battle. Instead, they fell on forces detached from the main body to raid or forage. The French shadowed the English and in October, the English found themselves being trapped against the River Allier by four separate French forces. With some difficulty, the English crossed at the bridge at Moulins but lost all their baggage and loot. The English carried on south across the Limousin plateau but the weather was turning severe. Men and horses died in great numbers and many soldiers, forced to march on foot, discarded their armour. At the beginning of December, the army finally entered friendly territory in Gascony. By the end of December they were in Bordeaux, starving, ill-equipped and having lost over half of the 30,000 horses with which they had left Calais. Although the march across France had been a remarkable feat, it was a military failure.[48]

English turmoil [ edit]  
With his health continuing to deteriorate, the Black Prince returned to England in January 1371, whereby now his father Edward III was elderly and also in poor health. The prince's illness was debilitating, and he died on 8 June 1376.[49]

Edward III died the following year on 21 June 1377;[50] he was succeeded by the Black Prince's second son Richard II (the first son had died sometime earlier), who was still a child.[51] The treaty at Brétigny left Edward III and England with enlarged holdings in France; however, a small professional French army under the leadership of du Guesclin pushed the English back and, by the time of Charles V's death in 1380, the English only held Calais and a few other coastal cities.[52]

It was usual to appoint a regent in the case of a child monarch, but no regent was appointed for Richard II, who nominally exercised the power of kingship from the date of his accession in 1377.[51] However, between 1377 and 1380, actual power was in the hands of a series of councils. The political community preferred this to a regency led by the king's uncle, John of Gaunt, although Gaunt remained highly influential.[51]

Richard faced many challenges during his reign, including the Peasants' Revolt led by Wat Tyler in 1381 and an Anglo-Scottish war in 1384–1385. His attempts to raise taxes to pay for his Scottish adventure and for the protection of Calais against the French made him increasingly unpopular.[51]

1380 campaign of the Earl of Buckingham [ edit]  
In July 1380, the Earl of Buckingham commanded an expedition to France to aid England's ally, the Duke of Brittany. The French refused battle before the walls of Troyes on 25 August, so Buckingham's forces continued their chevauchée and in November laid siege to Nantes.[53] However, expected support from the Duke of Brittany did not appear and, in the face of heavy losses in both men and horses, was forced to abandon the siege in January 1381.[54] In February 1381, now reconciled to the regime of the new French king Charles VI, Brittany paid 50,000 francs to Buckingham for him to abandon the siege and the campaign.[55]

French turmoil [ edit]  
After the deaths of Charles V and du Guesclin in 1380, France lost its main leadership and overall momentum in the war. Charles VI succeeded his father as king of France at the age of 11, and he was thus put under a regency led by his uncles, who managed to maintain an effective grip on government affairs until about 1388, well after Charles had achieved royal majority.

With France facing widespread destruction, plague, and economic recession, high taxation put a heavy burden on the French peasantry and urban communities. The war effort against England largely depended on royal taxation, but the population was increasingly unwilling to pay for it, as would be demonstrated at the Harelle and Maillotin revolts in 1382. Charles V had abolished many of these taxes on his deathbed, but subsequent attempts to reinstate them stirred up hostility between the French government and populace.

Difficulties in raising taxes and revenue hampered the ability of the French to fight the English. At this point, the war's pace had largely slowed down, and both nations found themselves fighting mainly through proxy wars, such as during the 1383–1385 Portuguese interregnum. The independence party in the Kingdom of Portugal, which was supported by the English, won against the supporters of the King of Castile's claim to the Portuguese throne, who in turn was backed by the French.

 Second peace: 1389–1415 [ edit]  

    v
    t
    e

Owain Glyndŵr's Revolt  

    Mynydd Hyddgen
    Tuthill
    Bryn Glas
    Shrewsbury
    Stalling Down
    Grosmont
    Pwll Melyn

See also: Armagnac–Burgundian Civil War
France in 1388, just before signing a truce. English territories are shown in red, French royal territories are dark blue, papal territories are orange, and French vassals have the other colours.
The war became increasingly unpopular with the English public largely due to the high taxes needed to sustain it. These taxes were seen as one of the reasons for the Peasants' revolt.[56] Richard's increasing disinterest in the war together with his preferential treatment of a select few close friends and advisors angered an alliance of lords that included one of his uncles. This group, known as Lords Appellant, managed to successfully press charges of treason against five of Richard's advisors and friends in the Merciless Parliament. The Lords Appellant were able to gain control of the council in 1388 and tried, unsuccessfully, to reignite the war in France. Although the will was there, the funds to pay the troops was lacking, so in the autumn of 1388 the Council agreed to resume negotiations with the French crown, beginning on 18 June 1389 with the signing of a three-year truce at Leulinghem.[56][57]

In 1389, Richard's uncle and supporter, John of Gaunt, returned from Spain and Richard was able to rebuild his power gradually until 1397, when he reasserted his authority and destroyed the principal three among the Lords Appellant. In 1399, after John of Gaunt died, Richard II disinherited Gaunt's son, the exiled Henry of Bolingbroke. Bolingbroke returned to England with his supporters and deposed Richard and had himself crowned Henry IV.[51][57][58]

In Scotland, the problems brought in by the English regime change prompted border raids that were countered by an invasion in 1402 and the defeat of a Scottish army at the Battle of Homildon Hill.[59] A dispute over the spoils between Henry and Henry Percy, 1st Earl of Northumberland, resulted in a long and bloody struggle between the two for control of northern England, resolved only with the almost complete destruction of the Percy family by 1408.[60][61]

In Wales, Owain Glyndŵr was declared Prince of Wales on 16 September 1400. He was the leader of the most serious and widespread rebellion against English authority in Wales since the conquest of 1282–1283. In 1405, the French allied with Glyndŵr and the Castilians in Spain and a Franco-Welsh army advanced as far as Worcester, while the Spaniards used galleys to raid and burn all the way from Cornwall to Southampton, before taking refuge in Harfleur for the winter.[62] The rebellion was finally put down only in 1415 and resulted in Welsh semi-independence for a number of years.[63]

Assassination of Louis I, Duke of Orléans in Paris in 1407
In 1392, Charles VI suddenly descended into madness, forcing France into a regency dominated by his uncles and his brother. An open conflict for control over the Regency began between his uncle Philip the Bold, Duke of Burgundy, and his brother, Louis of Valois, Duke of Orléans. After Philip's death, his son and heir John the Fearless continued the struggle against Louis, but with the disadvantage of having no close personal relation to the king. Finding himself outmanoeuvred politically, John ordered the assassination of Louis in retaliation. His involvement in the murder was quickly revealed, and the Armagnac family took political power in opposition to John. By 1410, both sides were bidding for the help of English forces in a civil war.[58] In 1418 Paris was taken by the Burgundians, who were unable to stop the massacre of Count of Armagnac and about 2,500 of his followers by a Parisian mob.[64]

Throughout this period, England confronted repeated raids by pirates that heavily damaged trade and the navy. There is some evidence that Henry IV used state-legalised piracy as a form of warfare in the English Channel. He used such privateering campaigns to pressure enemies without risking open war.[65] The French responded in kind and French pirates, under Scottish protection, raided many English coastal towns.[66]

The domestic and dynastic difficulties faced by England and France in this period quieted the war for a decade.[66]

Henry IV of England died in 1413 and was replaced by his eldest son Henry V. The mental illness of Charles VI of France allowed his power to be exercised by royal princes whose rivalries caused deep divisions in France. Henry V was well aware of these divisions and hoped to exploit them. In 1414 while he held court at Leicester, he received ambassadors from Burgundy.[67] Henry accredited envoys to the French king to make clear his territorial claims in France; he also demanded the hand of Charles VI's youngest daughter Catherine of Valois. The French rejected his demands, leading Henry to prepare for war.[67]

 Resumption of the war under Henry V: 1415–1429 [ edit]  

    v
    t
    e

Hundred Years' War
Lancastrian phase (1415–53)  

    Harfleur
    Agincourt
    Valmont
    Rouen
    2nd La Rochelle
    Baugé
    Meaux
    Cravant
    La Brossinière
    Verneuil
    St. James
    Orléans
    Herrings
    Loire
    Jargeau
    Meung-sur-Loire
    Beaugency
    Patay
    Reims
    Paris
    La Charité
    Compiègne
    Gerberoy
    St. Denis
    Calais
    Tartas
    Formigny
    Castillon

Main article: Hundred Years' War (1415–1453)
Burgundian alliance and the seizure of Paris [ edit]    Battle of Agincourt (1415) [ edit]  
Main article: Battle of Agincourt
Fifteenth-century miniature depicting the Battle of Agincourt of 1415.
In August 1415, Henry V sailed from England with a force of about 10,500 and laid siege to Harfleur. The city resisted for longer than expected, but finally surrendered on 22 September 1415. Because of the unexpected delay, most of the campaign season was gone. Rather than march on Paris directly, Henry elected to make a raiding expedition across France toward English-occupied Calais. In a campaign reminiscent of Crécy, he found himself outmanoeuvred and low on supplies and had to fight a much larger French army at the Battle of Agincourt, north of the Somme. Despite the problems and having a smaller force, his victory was near-total; the French defeat was catastrophic, costing the lives of many of the Armagnac leaders. About 40% of the French nobility was killed.[68] Henry was apparently concerned that the large number of prisoners taken were a security risk (there were more French prisoners than there were soldiers in the entire English army) and he ordered their deaths.[67]

 Treaty of Troyes (1420) [ edit]  
Main article: Treaty of Troyes
Clan Carmichael crest with a broken lance commemorating the unseating of the Duke of Clarence, leading to his death at the Battle of Baugé.
Henry retook much of Normandy, including Caen in 1417, and Rouen on 19 January 1419, turning Normandy English for the first time in two centuries. A formal alliance was made with the Duchy of Burgundy, which had taken Paris after the assassination of Duke John the Fearless in 1419. In 1420, Henry met with King Charles VI. They signed the Treaty of Troyes, by which Henry finally married Charles' daughter Catherine of Valois and Henry's heirs would inherit the throne of France. The Dauphin, Charles VII, was declared illegitimate. Henry formally entered Paris later that year and the agreement was ratified by the Estates-General.[67]

 Death of Clarence (1421) [ edit]  
On 22 March 1421 Henry V's progress in his French campaign experienced an unexpected reverse. Henry had left his brother and presumptive heir Thomas, Duke of Clarence in charge while he returned to England. Clarence engaged a Franco-Scottish force of 5000 men, led by Gilbert Motier de La Fayette and John Stewart, Earl of Buchan at the Battle of Baugé. Clarence, against the advice of his lieutenants, before his army had been fully assembled, attacked with a force of no more than 1500 men-at-arms. He then, during the course of the battle, led a charge of a few hundred men into the main body of the Franco-Scottish army, who quickly enveloped the English. In the ensuing melée, the Scot, John Carmichael of Douglasdale, broke his lance unhorsing the Duke of Clarence. Once on the ground, the duke was slain by Alexander Buchanan.[67][69] The body of the Duke of Clarence was recovered from the field by Thomas Montacute, 4th Earl of Salisbury, who conducted the English retreat.[70]

English success [ edit]  
Henry V returned to France and went to Paris, then visiting Chartres and G'tinais before returning to Paris. From there, he decided to attack the Dauphin-held town of Meaux. It turned out to be more difficult to overcome than first thought. The siege began about 6 October 1421, and the town held for seven months before finally falling on 11 May 1422.[67]

At the end of May, Henry was joined by his queen and together with the French court, they went to rest at Senlis. While there, it became apparent that he was ill (possibly dysentery), and when he set out to the Upper Loire, he diverted to the royal castle at Vincennes, near Paris, where he died on 31 August 1422.[67] The elderly and insane Charles VI of France died two months later on 21 October 1422. Henry left an only child, his nine-month-old son, Henry, later to become Henry VI.[71]

On his deathbed, Henry V had given the Duke of Bedford responsibility for English France (as Henry VI was only an infant). The war in France continued under Bedford's generalship and several battles were won. The English won an emphatic victory at the Battle of Verneuil (17 August 1424). At the Battle of Baugé, Clarence had rushed into battle without the support of his archers. At Verneuil, the archers fought to devastating effect against the Franco-Scottish army. The effect of the battle was to virtually destroy the Dauphin's field army and to eliminate the Scots as a significant military force for the rest of the war.[71][72]

 French victory: 1429–1453 [ edit]   Joan of Arc and French revival [ edit]  
Joan of Arc (picture c.1450–1500)
The appearance of Joan of Arc at the siege of Orléans sparked a revival of French spirit, and the tide began to turn against the English.[71] The English laid siege to Orléans in 1428, but their force was insufficient to fully invest the city. In 1429 Joan convinced the Dauphin to send her to the siege, saying she had received visions from God telling her to drive out the English. She raised the morale of the troops, and they attacked the English redoubts, forcing the English to lift the siege. Inspired by Joan, the French took several English strongholds on the Loire.[73]

The English retreated from the Loire Valley, pursued by a French army. Near the village of Patay, French cavalry broke through a unit of English longbowmen that had been sent to block the road, then swept through the retreating English army. The English lost 2,200 men, and the commander, John Talbot, 1st Earl of Shrewsbury, was taken prisoner. This victory opened the way for the Dauphin to march to Reims for his coronation as Charles VII, on 16 July 1429.[73][74]

After the coronation, Charles VII's army fared less well. An attempted French siege of Paris was defeated on 8 September 1429, and Charles VII withdrew to the Loire Valley.[75]

 Henry's coronations and the desertion of Burgundy [ edit]  
Henry VI was crowned king of England at Westminster Abbey on 5 November 1429 and king of France at Notre-Dame, in Paris, on 16 December 1431.[71]

The first Western image of a battle with cannon: the Siege of Orléans in 1429. From Les Vigiles de Charles VII, Bibliothèque nationale de France, Paris.
Joan of Arc was captured by the Burgundians at the siege of Compiègne on 23 May 1430. The Burgundians transferred her to the English, who organised a trial headed by Pierre Cauchon, Bishop of Beauvais and member of the English Council at Rouen. Joan was convicted and burned at the stake on 30 May 1431.[73] (She was rehabilitated 25 years later by Pope Callixtus III.)

After the death of Joan of Arc, the fortunes of war turned dramatically against the English.[76] Most of Henry's royal advisers were against making peace. Among the factions, the Duke of Bedford wanted to defend Normandy, the Duke of Gloucester was committed to just Calais, whereas Cardinal Beaufort was inclined to peace. Negotiations stalled. It seems that at the congress of Arras, in the summer of 1435, where the duke of Beaufort was mediator, the English were unrealistic in their demands. A few days after the congress ended in September, Philip III, duke of Burgundy, deserted to Charles VII, signing the Treaty of Arras that returned Paris to the King of France. This was a major blow to English sovereignty in France.[71] The Duke of Bedford died on 14 September 1435 and was later replaced by Richard Plantagenet, 3rd Duke of York.[76]

French resurgence [ edit]  
The Battle of Formigny (1450)
The allegiance of Burgundy remained fickle, but the English focus on expanding their domains in the Low Countries left them little energy to intervene in the rest of France.[77] The long truces that marked the war gave Charles time to centralise the French state and reorganise his army and government, replacing his feudal levies with a more modern professional army that could put its superior numbers to good use. A castle that once could only be captured after a prolonged siege would now fall after a few days from cannon bombardment. The French artillery developed a reputation as the best in the world.[76]

By 1449, the French had retaken Rouen. In 1450 the Count of Clermont and Arthur de Richemont, Earl of Richmond, of the Montfort family (the future Arthur III, Duke of Brittany), caught an English army attempting to relieve Caen and defeated it at the Battle of Formigny. Richemont's force attacked the English army from the flank and rear just as they were on the verge of beating Clermont's army.[78]

French conquest of Gascony [ edit]  
Charles "the Victorious" by Jean Fouquet. Louvre, Paris.
After Charles VII's successful Normandy campaign in 1450, he concentrated his efforts on Gascony, the last province held by the English. Bordeaux, Gascony's capital, was besieged and surrendered to the French on 30 June 1451. Largely due to the English sympathies of the Gascon people, this was reversed when John Talbot and his army retook the city on 23 October 1452. However, the English were decisively defeated at the Battle of Castillon on 17 July 1453. Talbot had been persuaded to engage the French army at Castillon near Bordeaux. During the battle the French appeared to retreat towards their camp. The French camp at Castillon had been laid out by Charles VII's ordnance officer Jean Bureau and this was instrumental in the French success as when the French cannon opened fire, from their positions in the camp, the English took severe casualties losing both Talbot and his son.[79]

End of the war [ edit]  
Although the Battle of Castillon is considered the last battle of the Hundred Years' War,[79] England and France remained formally at war for another 20 years, but the English were in no position to carry on the war as they faced unrest at home. Following defeat in the Hundred Years' War, English landowners complained vociferously about the financial losses resulting from the loss of their continental holdings; this is often considered a major cause of the Wars of the Roses, that started in 1455.[76][80]

    v
    t
    e

Burgundian Wars  (1474–77) 

    Neuss
    Héricourt
    Planta
    Grandson
    Morat
    Nancy

    Guinegate

The Hundred Years' War almost resumed in 1474, when the duke Charles of Burgundy, counting on English support, took up arms against Louis XI. Louis managed to isolate the Burgundians by buying Edward IV of England off with a large cash sum and an annual pension, in the Treaty of Picquigny (1475). The treaty formally ended the Hundred Years' War with Edward renouncing his claim to the throne of France. However, future Kings of England (and later of Great Britain) continued to claim the title until 1803, when they were dropped in deference to the exiled Count of Provence, titular King Louis XVIII, who was living in England after the French Revolution.[81]

Significance [ edit]  
Burgundian territories (orange/yellow) and limits of France (red) after the Burgundian War
Historical significance [ edit]  
The French victory marked the end of a long period of instability that had started with the Norman Conquest (1066), when William the Conqueror added "King of England" to his titles, becoming both the vassal to (as Duke of Normandy) and the equal of (as king of England) the king of France.[82]

When the war ended, England was bereft of its Continental possessions, leaving it with only Calais on the continent. The war destroyed the English dream of a joint monarchy and led to the rejection in England of all things French, but the French language in England, which had served as the language of the ruling classes and commerce there from the time of the Norman conquest, left many vestiges in English vocabulary. English became the official language in 1362 and French was no longer used for teaching from 1385.[83]

National feeling that emerged from the war unified both France and England further. Despite the devastation on its soil, the Hundred Years' War accelerated the process of transforming France from a feudal monarchy to a centralised state.[84] In England the political and financial troubles which emerged from the defeat were a major cause of the War of the Roses (1455–1487).[80]

The spread of the Black Death (with modern borders)
Lowe (1997) argued that opposition to the war helped to shape England's early modern political culture. Although anti-war and pro-peace spokesmen generally failed to influence outcomes at the time, they had a long-term impact. England showed decreasing enthusiasm for conflict deemed not in the national interest, yielding only losses in return for high economic burdens. In comparing this English cost-benefit analysis with French attitudes, given that both countries suffered from weak leaders and undisciplined soldiers, Lowe noted that the French understood that warfare was necessary to expel the foreigners occupying their homeland. Furthermore, French kings found alternative ways to finance the war – sales taxes, debasing the coinage – and were less dependent than the English on tax levies passed by national legislatures. English anti-war critics thus had more to work with than the French.[85]

Bubonic plague and warfare reduced population numbers throughout Europe during this period. France lost half its population during the Hundred Years' War.[68] Normandy lost three-quarters of its population, and Paris two-thirds.[86] The population of England was reduced by 20 to 33 percent due to plague in the same period.[87]

Military significance [ edit]  
In 1445 the first regular standing army in Western Europe since Roman times was organised in France partly as a solution to marauding free companies. The mercenary companies were given a choice of either joining the Royal army as compagnies d'ordonnance on a permanent basis, or being hunted down and destroyed if they refused. France gained a total standing army of around 6,000 men, which was sent out to gradually eliminate the remaining mercenaries who insisted on operating on their own. The new standing army had a more disciplined and professional approach to warfare than its predecessors.[88]

The Hundred Years' War was a time of rapid military evolution. Weapons, tactics, army structure and the social meaning of war all changed, partly in response to the war's costs, partly through advancement in technology and partly through lessons that warfare taught. The feudal system was slowly disintegrating throughout the hundred years war.

By the war's end, although the heavy cavalry was still considered the most powerful unit in an army, the heavily armoured horse had to deal with several tactics developed to deny or mitigate its effective use on a battlefield.[89] The English began using lightly armoured mounted troops, known as hobelars. Hobelars tactics had been developed against the Scots, in the Anglo-Scottish wars of the 14th century. Hobelars rode smaller unarmoured horses, enabling them to move through difficult or boggy terrain where heavier cavalry would struggle. Rather than fight while seated on the horse, they would dismount to engage the enemy.[88][90][91]

Timeline [ edit]  
[Image: TimeLine100YearsWar (cropped).png]  
Battles [ edit]  
Further information: List of Hundred Years' War battles
Important figures [ edit]   France [ edit]   Arms Historical Figure Life Notes [Image: Blason pays fr FranceAncien.svg]   King Philip VI 1293–1350, reigned 1328–1350 Charles of Valois' son King John II 1319–1364, reigned 1350–1364 Philip VI's son King Charles V 1338–1380, reigned 1364–1380 John II's son [Image: Blason du Guesclin.svg]   Bertrand du Guesclin 1320–1380 Commander [Image: Blason comte fr Valois.svg]   Louis I, Duke of Anjou 1339–1384, regent 1380–1382 John II's son [Image: Blason France moderne.svg]   King Charles VI 1368–1422, reigned 1380–1422 Charles V's son King Charles VII 1403–1461, reigned 1422–1461 Charles VI's son [Image: Blason Jeanne-d-Arc.svg]   Joan of Arc 1412–1431 Religious visionary [Image: Blason Etienne de Vignolles (La Hire).svg]   La Hire 1390–1443 Commander [Image: Blason Jean Poton de Xaintrailles.svg]   Jean Poton de Xaintrailles 1390–1461 Commander [Image: Blason province fr Alençon.svg]   Jean II, Duke of Alençon 1409–1476 Commander [Image: Blason comte fr Longueville (ancien).svg]   Jean de Dunois 1402–1468 Commander [Image: Blason JeanBureau.svg]   Jean Bureau 1390–1463 Master Gunner [Image: Blason Gilles de Rais.svg]   Gilles de Rais 1405–1440 Commander England [ edit]   Arms Historical Figure Life Notes [Image: Arms of Isabella of France.svg]   Isabella of France 1295–1358 Queen consort of England, wife of Edward II, mother of Edward III, regent of England, sister of Charles IV and daughter of Philip IV of France [Image: Royal Arms of England (1340-1367).svg]   King Edward III 1312–1377, reigned 1327–1377 Philip IV's grandson [Image: Arms of Edmund Crouchback, Earl of Leicester and Lancaster.svg]   Henry of Grosmont, Duke of Lancaster 1310–1361 Commander [Image: Arms of the Prince of Wales (Ancient).svg]   Edward, the Black Prince 1330–1376 Edward III's son [Image: Arms of John of Gaunt, 1st Duke of Lancaster.svg]   John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster 1340–1399 Edward III's son [Image: Royal Arms of England (1395-1399).svg]   King Richard II 1367–1400, reigned 1377–1399 Son of the Black Prince, Edward III's grandson [Image: Royal Arms of England (1340-1367).svg]   King Henry IV 1367–1413, reigned 1399–1413 John of Gaunt's son, Edward III's grandson [Image: Royal Arms of England (1399-1603).svg]   King Henry V 1387–1422, reigned 1413–1422 Henry IV's son [Image: Arms of Catherine of Valois.svg]   Catherine of Valois 1401–1437 Queen consort of England, daughter of Charles VI of France, mother of Henry VI of England and by her second marriage grandmother of Henry VII [Image: Arms of John of Lancaster, 1st Duke of Bedford.svg]   John of Lancaster, Duke of Bedford 1389–1435, regent 1422–1435 Henry IV's son [Image: Coat of Arms of Sir John Fastolf, KG.png]   Sir John Fastolf[74] 1380–1459 Commander [Image: Coat of Arms of Sir John Talbot, 7th Baron Talbot, KG.png]   John Talbot, 1st Earl of Shrewsbury 1387–1453 Commander [Image: Royal Arms of England (1470-1471).svg]   King Henry VI 1421–1471, reigned 1422–1461 (also 1422–1453 as king Henry II of France) Henry V's son, grandson of Charles VI of France [Image: Arms of Richard of York, 3rd Duke of York.svg]   Richard Plantagenet, 3rd Duke of York 1411–1460 Commander Burgundy [ edit]   Arms Historical Figure Life Notes [Image: Blason fr Bourgogne.svg]   Philip the Bold, Duke of Burgundy 1342–1404, duke 1363–1404 Son of John II of France [Image: John the Fearless Arms.svg]   John the Fearless, Duke of Burgundy 1371–1419, duke 1404–1419 Son of Philip the Bold [Image: Philip the Good Arms.svg]   Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy 1396–1467, duke 1419–1467 Son of John the Fearless See also [ edit]  

    Timeline of the Hundred Years' War
    French military history
    British military history
    Influence of French on English
    Anglo-French relations
    Medieval demography
    Capetian–Plantagenet rivalry – this conflict is also called by some historians, the "First Hundred Years War".
    Second Hundred Years' War – this is the name given by some historians to the near-continuous series of conflicts between Britain and France from 1688 to 1815, beginning with the Glorious Revolution and ending with the Battle of Waterloo.
    List of battles involving France in the Middle Ages

Notes [ edit]  

    ^  Fought against England during Despenser's Crusade. 
    ^  Fought with England during Despenser's Crusade. 
    ^  24 May 1337 is the day when Philip VI of France confiscated Aquitaine from Edward III of England, who responded by claiming the French throne. 19 October 1453 is when Bordeaux fell to the French; there were no more hostilities afterwards. 



    ^ a b  Brissaud 1915, pp. 329–330. 
    ^  Previté-Orton 1978, p. 872. 
    ^  Bartlett 2000, p. 22. 
    ^  Bartlett 2000, p. 17. 
    ^  Gormley 2007. 
    ^  Harris 1994, p. 8. 
    ^ a b  Prestwich 1988, p. 298. 
    ^  Prestwich 2007, pp. 292–293. 
    ^  Wilson 2011, p. 194. 
    ^  Prestwich 2007, p. 394. 
    ^ a b  Prestwich 2007, p. 306. 
    ^  Prestwich 2007, pp. 304–305. 
    ^  Sumption 1999, p. 180. 
    ^  Sumption 1999, p. 184. 
    ^  Prestwich 2003, pp. 149–150. 
    ^ a b  Prestwich 2007, pp. 307–312. 
    ^ a b  Friar 2004, pp. 480–481. 
    ^  R.E.Glassock. England circa 1334 in Darby 1976, p. 160 
    ^  Sumption 1999, pp. 188–189. 
    ^  Sumption 1999, pp. 233–234. 
    ^ a b c  Rogers 2010, pp. 88–89. 
    ^  Auray, France. Encyclopedia Britannica. Archived from the original on 15 April 2018. Retrieved 14 April  2018 .  
    ^ a b  Prestwich 2007, pp. 318–319. 
    ^  Rogers 2010, pp. 55–45. 
    ^  Grummitt 2008, p. 1. 
    ^  The Black Death, transl. & ed. Rosemay Horrox, (Manchester University Press, 1994), 9. 
    ^  Hunt 1903, p. 388. 
    ^ a b  Le Patourel 1984, pp. 20–21. 
    ^  Wilson 2011, p. 218. 
    ^ a b c d  Guignebert 1930, Volume 1. pp. 304–307. 
    ^  Venette 1953, p. 66. 
    ^ a b  Prestwich 2007, p. 326. 
    ^  Le Patourel 1984, p. 189. 
    ^  "Apr 13, 1360: Hail kills English troops". History.com. Archived from the original on 5 September 2012. Retrieved 22 January  2016 .  
    ^  Le Patourel 1984, p. 32. 
    ^ a b  Chisholm 1911, p. 501. 
    ^  Wagner 2006, pp. 102–103. 
    ^  Ormrod 2001, p. 384. 
    ^  Backman 2003, pp. 179–180 – Nobles captured in battle were held in "Honorable Captivity", which recognised their status as prisoners of war and permitted ransom. 
    ^  Britannica. Treaty of Brétigny Archived 1 November 2012 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 21 September 2012 
    ^  Wagner 2006, pp. 86. 
    ^  Curry 2002, pp. 69–70. 
    ^ a b  Wagner 2006, p. 78. 
    ^ a b  Wagner 2006, p. 122. 
    ^  Wagner 2006, pp. 3–4. 
    ^  The Safeguard of the Sea: A Naval History of Britain 660–1649. Penguin UK. 2004. p. 52.  
    ^  Medieval Culture and the Mexican American Borderlands. Texas A&M University Press. 2001. p. 186.  
    ^  Sumption 2012, pp. 187–196. 
    ^  Barber 2004. 
    ^  Ormrod 2008. 
    ^ a b c d e  Tuck 2004. 
    ^  Francoise Autrand. Charles V King of France in Vauchéz 2000, pp. 283–284 
    ^  Sumption 2012, pp. 385–390, 396–399. 
    ^  Sumption 2012, p. 409. 
    ^  Sumption 2012, p. 411. 
    ^ a b  Baker 2000, p. 6. 
    ^ a b  Neillands 2001, pp. 182–184. 
    ^ a b  Curry 2002, pp. 77–82. 
    ^  Mortimer 2008, pp. 253–254. 
    ^  Mortimer 2008, pp. 263–264. 
    ^  Bean 2008. 
    ^  Agincourt: Myth and Reality 1915–2015. p. 70.  
    ^  Smith 2008. 
    ^  Sizer 2007 
    ^  Ian Friel. The English and War at Sea. c.1200-c.1500 in Hattendorf & Unger 2003, pp. 76–77 
    ^ a b  Nolan. The Age of Wars of Religion. p. 424 
    ^ a b c d e f g  Allmand 2010. 
    ^ a b  Turchin 2003, pp. 179–180. 
    ^  Wagner 2006, pp. 44–45. 
    ^  Harriss 2010. 
    ^ a b c d e  Griffiths 2015. 
    ^  Wagner 2006, pp. 307–308. 
    ^ a b c  Davis 2003, pp. 76–80. 
    ^ a b  "Sir John Fastolf (MC 2833/1)". Norwich: Norfolk Record Office. Archived from the original on 23 September 2015. Retrieved 20 December  2012 .  
    ^  Jaques 2007, p. 777. 
    ^ a b c d  Lee 1998, pp. 145–147. 
    ^  Sumption 1999, p. 562. 
    ^  Nicolle 2012, pp. 26–35. 
    ^ a b  Wagner 2006, p. 79. 
    ^ a b  "Every version of the complaints put forward by the rebels in 1450 harps on the losses in France" (Webster 1998, pp. 39–40). 
    ^  Neillands 2001, pp. 290–291. 
    ^  Janvrin & Rawlinson 2016, p. 15. 
    ^  Janvrin & Rawlinson 2016, p. 16. 
    ^  Holmes Jr. & Schutz 1948, p. 61. 
    ^  Lowe 1997, pp. 147–195 
    ^  Ladurie 1987, p. 32. 
    ^  Neillands 2001, pp. 110–111. 
    ^ a b  Preston, Wise & Werner 1991, pp. 84–91 
    ^  Powicke 1962, p. 189. 
    ^  Colm McNamee. Hobelars in Rogers 2010, pp. 267–268 
    ^  Jones 2008, pp. 1–17. 

References [ edit]  

    Allmand, C. (23 September 2010). "Henry V (1386–1422)". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/12952. Archived from the original on 10 August 2018. 
    Backman, Clifford R. (2003). The Worlds of Medieval Europe. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-533527-9. 
    Baker, Denise Nowakowski, ed. (2000). Inscribing the Hundred Years' War in French and English Cultures. SUNY Press. ISBN 978-0-7914-4701-7. 
    Barber, R. (2004). "Edward, prince of Wales and of Aquitaine (1330–1376)". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/8523. (Subscription or UK public library membership required.) 
    Bartlett, R. (2000). J.M. Roberts (ed.). England under the Norman and Angevin Kings 1075–1225. New Oxford History of England. London: OUP. ISBN 978-0-19-822741-0. 
    Bean, J.M.W. (2008). "Percy, Henry, first earl of Northumberland (1341–1408)". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/21932. (Subscription or UK public library membership required.) 
    Brissaud, Jean (1915). History of French Public Law. The Continental Legal History. 9. Translated by James W. Garner. Boston: Little, Brown and Company. 
    Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Brétigny"  . Encyclopædia Britannica. 4 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 501. 
    Curry, A. (13 November 2002). The Hundred Years' War 1337–1453 (PDF) . Essential Histories. 19. Oxford: Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84176-269-2. 
    Darby, H.C. (1976) [1973]. A New Historical Geography of England before 1600. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-29144-6. 
    Davis, P. (29 May 2003). Besieged: 100 Great Sieges from Jericho to Sarajevo (2nd ed.). Santa Barbara, CA: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-521930-2. 
    Friar, Stephen (19 August 2004). The Sutton Companion to Local History (revised ed.). Sparkford: Sutton. ISBN 978-0-7509-2723-9. 
    Gormley, Larry (2007). "The Hundred Years War: Overview". eHistory. Ohio State University. Archived from the original on 14 December 2012. Retrieved 20 September  2012 . 
    Griffiths, R.A. (28 May 2015). "Henry VI (1421–1471)". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/12953. Archived from the original on 10 August 2018. 
    Grummitt, David (2008). The Calais Garrison: War and Military Service in England, 1436–1558. Woodbridge: Boydell Press. ISBN 978-1-84383-398-7. 
    Guignebert, Charles (1930). A Short History of the French People. 1. Translated by F. G. Richmond. New York: Macmillan Company. 
    Harris, Robin (1994). Valois Guyenne. Studies in History. 71. Royal Historical Society. ISBN 978-0-86193-226-9. ISSN 0269-2244. 
    Harriss, G.L. (September 2010). "Thomas, duke of Clarence (1387–1421)". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/27198. (Subscription or UK public library membership required.) 
    Hattendorf, J. & Unger, R., eds. (2003). War at Sea in the Middle Ages and Renaissance. Woodbridge: Boydell Press. ISBN 978-0-85115-903-4. 
    Holmes Jr., U. & Schutz, A. (1948). A History of the French Language (revised ed.). Columbus, OH: Harold L. Hedrick. 
    Jaques, Tony (2007). "Paris, 1429, Hundred Years War". Dictionary of Battles and Sieges: P-Z. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 777. ISBN 978-0-313-33539-6. 
    Jones, Robert (2008). "Re-thinking the origins of the 'Irish' Hobelar" (PDF) . Cardiff Historical Papers. Cardiff School of History and Archaeology. 
    Janvrin, Isabelle; Rawlinson, Catherine (6 June 2016). The French in London: From William the Conqueror to Charles de Gaulle. Translated by Emily Read. Wilmington Square Books. ISBN 978-1-908524-65-2. 
    Lee, C. (1998). This Sceptred Isle 55BC–1901. London: Penguin Books. ISBN 0-14-026133-8. 
    Ladurie, E. (1 February 1987). The French Peasantry 1450–1660. Translated by Alan Sheridan. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-05523-0. 
     Hunt, William (1903). "Edward the Black Prince". In Lee, Sidney (ed.). Index and Epitome. Dictionary of National Biography. Cambridge University Press. p. 388. 
    Lowe, Ben (1997). Imagining Peace: History of Early English Pacifist Ideas. University Park, PA: Penn State University Press. ISBN 978-0-271-01689-4. 
    Mortimer, I. (2008). The Fears of Henry IV: The Life of England's Self-Made King. London: Jonathan Cape. ISBN 978-1-84413-529-5. 
    Neillands, R. (8 November 2001). The Hundred Years Wa2ndion=revised. London: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-26131-9. 
    Nicolle, D. (20 February 2012). The Fall of English France 1449–53 (PDF) . Campaign. 241. Illustrated by Graham Turner. Colchester: Osprey Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84908-616-5. Archived (PDF)  from the original on 8 August 2013. 
    Ormrod, W. (2001). Edward III. Yale English Monarchs series. London: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-11910-7. 
    Ormrod, W. (3 January 2008). "Edward III (1312–1377)". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/8519 . Archived from the original on 16 July 2018. 
    Le Patourel, J. (1 July 1984). Michael Jones (ed.). Feudal Empires: Norman and Plantagenet. London: Hambledon Continuum. ISBN 978-0-907628-22-4. 
    Powicke, Michael (1962). Military Obligation in Medieval England. Oxford: Clarendon Press. ISBN 978-0-19-820695-8. 
    Preston, Richard; Wise, Sydney F.; Werner, Herman O. (1991). Men in arms: a history of warfare and its interrelationships with Western society (5th ed.). Beverley MA: Wadsworth Publishing Co Inc. ISBN 978-0-03-033428-3. 
    Prestwich, M. (1988). Edward I. English Monarchs series. University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-06266-5. 
    Prestwich, M. (13 March 2003). The Three Edwards: War and State in England, 1272–1377 (2nd ed.). London: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-30309-5. 
    Prestwich, M. (13 September 2007). J.M. Roberts (ed.). Plantagenet England 1225–1360. OUP. ISBN 978-0-19-922687-0. 
    Previté-Orton, C. (1978). The shorter Cambridge Medieval History. 2. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-20963-2. 
    Rogers, C., ed. (15 July 2010). The Oxford Encyclopedia of Medieval Warfare and Military Technology. 1. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-533403-6. 
    Sizer, Michael (2007). "The Calamity of Violence: Reading the Paris Massacres of 1418". Proceedings of the Western Society for French History. 35. ISSN 2573-5012. 
    Smith, Llinos (2008). "Glyn Dŵr, Owain (c.1359–c.1416)". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/10816. (Subscription or UK public library membership required.) 
    Sumption, J. (1999). The Hundred Years War 1: Trial by Battle. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. ISBN 978-0-571-13895-1. 
    Sumption, J. (4 October 2012). The Hundred Years War 3: Divided Houses. London: Faber & Faber. ISBN 978-0-571-24012-8. 
    Tuck, Richard (2004). "Richard II (1367–1400)". Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/23499. (Subscription or UK public library membership required.) 
    Turchin, P. (2003). Historical Dynamics: Why States Rise and Fall. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-11669-3. 
    Vauchéz, Andre, ed. (2000). Encyclopedia of the Middle ages. Volume 1. Cambridge: James Clark. ISBN 1-57958-282-6. 
    Venette, J. (1953). Richard A. Newall (ed.). The Chronicle of Jean de Venette. Translated by Jean Birdsall. Columbia University Press. 
    Wagner, J. (2006). Encyclopedia of the Hundred Years War (PDF) . Westport: Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-32736-0. Archived from the original (PDF)  on 16 July 2018. 
    Webster, Bruce (1998). The Wars of the Roses. London: UCL Press. ISBN 978-1-85728-493-5. 
    Wilson, Derek (1 September 2011). The Plantagenets: The Kings That Made Britain. London: Quercus. ISBN 978-0-85738-004-3. 

  Further reading [ edit]  

    Barker, J. (2012). Conquest: The English Kingdom of France 1417–1450 (PDF) . Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-06560-4. Archived (PDF)  from the original on 12 June 2018. 
    Corrigan, Gordon (2014), A Great and Glorious Adventure: A Military History of the Hundred Years War, Atlantic Books, ISBN 978-1-84887-927-0
    Favier, Jean (1980). La Guerre de Cent Ans. Paris: Fayard. ISBN 978-2-213-00898-1. 
    Froissart, Jean (1895). Macaulay, George Campbell (ed.). The Chronicles of Froissart. Translated by Bourchier, John; Lord Berners. London: Macmillan and Son. Retrieved 24 September  2012 . 
    Green, David (2014), The Hundred Years War: A People's History. New Haven and London: Yale. ISBN 0-300-13451-7
    Lambert, Craig L. (2011). "Edward III's siege of Calais: A reappraisal". Journal of Medieval History. 37 (3): 245–256. doi:10.1016/j.jmedhist.2011.05.002. 
    Seward, D. (27 March 2003). The Hundred Years War: The English in France, 1337–1453. Brief Histories (revised ed.). London: Robinson. ISBN 978-1-84119-678-7. 

External links [ edit]   Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article Hundred Years' War. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Hundred Years' War.

    The Hundred Years War and the History of Navarre
    "Timeline of the Hundred Years War". 
    The Hundred Years' War (1336–1565) by Dr. Lynn H. Nelson, University of Kansas Emeritus
    The Hundred Years' War information and game
    Jean Froissart, "On The Hundred Years War (1337–1453)" from the Internet Medieval Sourcebook
    Online database of Soldiers serving in the Hundred Years War. University of Southampton and University of Reading.
    "Causes of the Wars of the Roses: An Overview". Luminarium Encyclopedia (Online Resource ed.). 26 April 2007. Retrieved 14 September  2017 . 

    v
    t
    e

Hundred Years' War

    Battles
    Chevauchées
    Armagnacs and Burgundians
    Jacquerie
    War of the Breton Succession
    Castilian Civil War

    v
    t
    e

History of Europe
Prehistory

    Paleolithic Europe
    Neolithic Europe
    Bronze Age Europe
    Iron Age Europe

Classical antiquity

    Classical Greece
    Roman Republic
    Hellenistic period
    Roman Empire
    Early Christianity
        Christianity in late antiquity
    Crisis of the Third Century
    Fall of the Western Roman Empire
    Late antiquity

Middle Ages

    Early Middle Ages
    Migration Period
    Christianity in the Middle Ages
        Christianization
    Francia
    Byzantine Empire
    Bulgarian Empire
        First
        Second
    Maritime republics
    Viking Age
    Kievan Rus'
    Holy Roman Empire
    High Middle Ages
    Feudalism
    Crusades
    Mongol invasion
    Serbian Empire
    Late Middle Ages
    Hundred Years' War
    Kalmar Union
    Renaissance

Early modern

    Christianity in the modern era
        Reformation
    Age of Discovery
    Baroque
    Thirty Years' War
    Absolute monarchy
    Ottoman Empire
    Portuguese Empire
    Spanish Empire
    Early modern France
    Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth
    Cossack Hetmanate
    Swedish Empire
    Dutch Republic
    British Empire
    Habsburg Monarchy
    Russian Empire
    Age of Enlightenment

Modern

    Great Divergence
    Industrial Revolution
    French Revolution
    Napoleonic Wars
    Nationalism
    Revolutions of 1848
    World War I
    Russian Revolution
    Interwar period
    World War II
    Cold War
    European integration

See also

    Art of Europe
    Genetic history of Europe
    History of Christianity
    History of the Mediterranean region
    History of the European Union
    History of Western civilization
    Maritime history of Europe
    Military history of Europe

Authority control [Image: Edit this at Wikidata]  

    GND: 4160808-2  
    HDS: 24646  
    LCCN: sh85062988  
    NDL: 00563842  
    NKC: ph202169  

Series of conflicts and wars between England and France during the 14th and 15th-century
Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hundred_Years%27_War&oldid=908477223"
Categories:

    Hundred Years' War
    14th century in France
    15th century in France
    Anglo-French wars
    Wars of the Middle Ages
    Wars involving Scotland
    Wars involving Luxembourg
    Wars involving Portugal
    Wars involving the Holy Roman Empire
    Global conflicts

Hidden categories:

    Webarchive template wayback links
    Use dmy dates from April 2013
    All articles with unsourced statements
    Articles with unsourced statements from September 2017
    Portal templates with all redlinked portals
    Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the ODNB
    Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference
    Wikipedia articles incorporating information from the Dictionary of National Biography Index and Epitome
    Commons category link is on Wikidata
    Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with HDS identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with NKC identifiers
    Articles with short description

Navigation menu
Personal tools

    Not logged in
    Talk
    Contributions
    Create account
    Log in

Namespaces

    Article 
    Talk 

Variants 

Views

    Read 
    Edit 
    View history 

More 

Search
Navigation

    Main page
    Contents
    Featured content
    Current events
    Random article
    Donate to Wikipedia
    Wikipedia store

Interaction

    Help
    About Wikipedia
    Community portal
    Recent changes
    Contact page

Tools

    What links here
    Related changes
    Upload file
    Special pages
    Permanent link
    Page information
    Wikidata item
    Cite this page

In other projects

    Wikimedia Commons

Print/export

    Create a book
    Download as PDF
    Printable version

Languages

    Afrikaans
    Alemannisch
    አማርኛ
    العربية
    Aragonés
    Asturianu
    Azərbaycanca
    تۆرکجه
    বাংলা
    B'n-l'm-gú
    Башҡортса
    Беларуская
    Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎
    Български
    Bosanski
    Brezhoneg
    Буряад
    Català
    Čeština
    Cymraeg
    Dansk
    Deutsch
    Eesti
    Ελληνικά
    Español
    Esperanto
    Euskara
    فارسی
    Fiji Hindi
    Français
    Frysk
    Gaeilge
    Galego
    한국어
    Հայերեն
    हिन्दी
    Hrvatski
    Ido
    Ilokano
    Bahasa Indonesia
    Íslenska
    Italiano
    עברית
    Kabɩyɛ
    Къарачай-малкъар
    ქართული
    Қазақша
    Kiswahili
    Кыргызча
    Latina
    Latviešu
    Lëtzebuergesch
    Лезги
    Lietuvių
    Ligure
    Lumbaart
    Magyar
    Македонски
    മലയാളം
    मराठी
    მარგალური
    مصرى
    مازِرونی
    Bahasa Melayu
    Монгол
    Nederlands
    日本語
    Norsk
    Norsk nynorsk
    Nouormand
    Occitan
    Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча
    ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
    پنجابی
    Picard
    Polski
    Português
    Rom'nă
    Русиньскый
    Русский
    Саха тыла
    Sardu
    Scots
    Simple English
    سنڌي
    Slovenčina
    Slovenščina
    کوردی
    Српски / srpski
    Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
    Suomi
    Svenska
    தமிழ்
    Татарча/tatarça
    తెలుగు
    ไทย
    Türkçe
    Türkmençe
    Українська
    اردو
    Vahcuengh
    Tiếng Việt
    West-Vlams
    Winaray
    吴语
    ייִדיש
    粵語
    Zazaki
    Žemaitėška
    中文

Edit links 

    This page was last edited on 30 July 2019, at 00:02 (UTC) .
    Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

    Privacy policy
    About Wikipedia
    Disclaimers
    Contact Wikipedia
    Developers
    Cookie statement
    Mobile view

    [Image: Wikimedia Foundation]  	
    [Image: Powered by MediaWiki]  	



Textise: Back to top
This text-only page was created by Textise (www.textise.net) © Textise - CPC LLC
To find out more about our product, visit Textise.org.


-------------------------------------------------



Are you a webmaster? Find out how to easily add Textise to your web site.

This page has been Textised!
The original page address was https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/India
For sharing use http://tinyurl.com/owrw4py

Here are some options:

- Back to original page (in this window | in a new window)
- Convert this page to a PDF
- Print this page
- Textise Home Page (full version | text only version)
- Textise Options Page (choose font size, font colour, etc.)

Are you a webmaster? Find out how to easily add Textise to your web site.

[Image: This is a featured article. Click here for more information.]  
[Image: Extended-protected article]  
India
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigation Jump to search
This article is about the Republic of India. For other uses, see India (disambiguation).
Country in South Asia

Republic of India

Bhārat Gaṇarājya
[Image: Horizontal tricolor flag bearing, from top to bottom, deep saffron, white, and green horizontal bands. In the centre of the white band is a navy-blue wheel with 24 spokes.]  
Flag
[Image: Three lions facing left, right, and toward viewer, atop a frieze containing a galloping horse, a 24-spoke wheel, and an elephant. Underneath is a motto: "सत्यमेव जयते".]  
State emblem
Motto: "Satyameva Jayate"  (Sanskrit) 
"Truth Alone Triumphs"[1] 
Anthem: "Jana Gana Mana" [2][3]
"Thou Art the Ruler of the Minds of All People" [4][2] 
National song
"Vande Mataram"  (Sanskrit) 
"I Bow to Thee, Mother" [a][1][2] 
[Image: Image of a globe centred on India, with India highlighted.]  
Area controlled by India shown in dark green;
regions claimed but not controlled shown in light green
CapitalNew Delhi
28°36′50″N  77°12′30″E   ﻿ / ﻿ 28.61389°N 77.20833°E ﻿ / 28.61389; 77.20833    Largest city

    Mumbai
    18°58′30″N  72°49′33″E   ﻿ / ﻿ 18.97500°N 72.82583°E ﻿ / 18.97500; 72.82583    

Official languages

    Hindi
    English[b][7]

Recognised regional languages 
State level and
Eighth Schedule[8]

        Assamese
        Bengali
        Bodo
        Dogri
        Gujarati
        Kannada
        Kashmiri
        Kokborok
        Konkani
        Maithili
        Malayalam
        Manipuri
        Marathi
        Mizo
        Nepali
        Odia
        Punjabi
        Sanskrit
        Santali
        Sindhi
        Tamil
        Telugu
        Urdu

National languageNone[9][10][11]Religion

    79.8% Hinduism
    14.2% Islam
    2.3% Christianity
    1.7% Sikhism
    0.7% Buddhism
    0.4% Jainism
    0.9% others[c][12]

See Religion in IndiaDemonym(s)IndianMembershipUN, WTO, BRICS, SAARC, SCO, G8+5, G20, Commonwealth of NationsGovernmentFederal parliamentary republic
• President
Ram Nath Kovind
• Vice President
Venkaiah Naidu
• Prime Minister
Narendra Modi  
• Chief Justice
Ranjan Gogoi
• Speaker of the Lok Sabha
Om Birla LegislatureParliament
• Upper house
Rajya Sabha
• Lower house
Lok SabhaIndependence 
from the United Kingdom
• Dominion
15 August 1947
• Republic
26 January 1950 Area
• Total
3,287,263[6] km2 (1,269,219 sq mi)[d] (7th)
• Water (%)
9.6Population
• 2016 estimate
[Image: Increase]  1,324,171,354[13] (2nd)
• 2011 census
1,210,854,977[14][15] (2nd)
• Density
402.4/km2 (1,042.2/sq mi) (31st)GDP (PPP) 2019 estimate
• Total
[Image: Increase]   $11.468 trillion[16] (3rd)
• Per capita
[Image: Increase]   $8,484[16] (119th)GDP (nominal) 2019 estimate
• Total
[Image: Increase]   $2.972 trillion[16] (5th)
• Per capita
[Image: Increase]   $2,199[16] (142nd)Gini (2013) 33.9[17]
medium   · 79thHDI (2017) [Image: Increase]   0.640[18]
medium   · 130thCurrencyIndian rupee (₹) (INR)Time zoneUTC+05:30  (IST)DST is not observedDate formatdd-mm-yyyy Driving sideleftCalling code+91ISO 3166 codeINInternet TLD.in (others)
India (official name: the Republic of India;[e] Hindi: Bhārat Gaṇarājya) is a country in South Asia. It is the seventh-largest country by area, the second-most populous country, and the most populous democracy in the world. Bounded by the Indian Ocean on the south, the Arabian Sea on the southwest, and the Bay of Bengal on the southeast, it shares land borders with Pakistan to the west;[f] China, Nepal, and Bhutan to the north; and Bangladesh and Myanmar to the east. In the Indian Ocean, India is in the vicinity of Sri Lanka and the Maldives; its Andaman and Nicobar Islands share a maritime border with Thailand and Indonesia.

The Indian subcontinent was home to the Indus Valley Civilisation of the bronze age. In India's Iron Age, the oldest scriptures of Hinduism were composed, social stratification based on caste emerged, and Buddhism and Jainism arose. Political consolidations took place under the Maurya and Gupta Empires; the peninsular Middle Kingdoms influenced the cultures of Southeast Asia. In India's medieval era, Judaism, Zoroastrianism, Christianity, and Islam arrived, and Sikhism emerged, adding to a diverse culture. North India fell to the Delhi Sultanate; south India was united under the Vijayanagara Empire. In the early modern era, the expansive Mughal Empire was followed by East India Company rule. India's modern age was marked by British Crown rule and a nationalist movement which, under Mahatma Gandhi, was noted for nonviolence and led to India's independence in 1947.

Economic liberalisation, begun in 1991, has caused India to become a fast growing major economy and a newly industrialised country. Its gross domestic product ranks sixth in the world in market exchange rates and third in purchasing power parity.[16] Its per capita income ranks 133rd and 116th in the two measures.[16] India faces challenges of poverty, corruption, malnutrition, and inadequate public healthcare. A nuclear weapons state and regional power, it has the second largest active military in the world and ranks high in military expenditure. India is a secular, federal republic, governed in a democratic parliamentary system, and administered in 29 states and seven union territories. A pluralistic, multilingual and multi-ethnic society, India is home to 1.3 billion people. It is also home to a high diversity of wildlife in a variety of protected habitats.[19]

Contents 

    1  Etymology 
    2  History 
        2.1  Ancient India 
        2.2  Medieval India 
        2.3  Early modern India 
        2.4  Modern India 
    3  Geography 
    4  Biodiversity 
    5  Politics and government 
        5.1  Politics 
        5.2  Government 
        5.3  Administrative divisions 
    6  Foreign, economic and strategic relations 
    7  Economy 
        7.1  Industries 
        7.2  Socio-economic challenges 
    8  Demographics, languages, and religion 
    9  Culture 
        9.1  Art, architecture and literature 
        9.2  Performing arts, and media 
        9.3  Society, clothing, and cuisine 
        9.4  Sports and recreation 
    10  See also 
    11  Notes 
    12  References 
    13  Bibliography 
    14  External links 

Etymology 
According to the Oxford English Dictionary (Third Edition 2009), the name India is derived from the Classical Latin India, a reference to South Asia and an uncertain region to its east; and in turn derived successively from: Hellenistic Greek India ( Ἰνδία); ancient Greek Indos ( Ἰνδός); Old Persian Hindush, an eastern province of the Achaemenid empire; and ultimately its cognate, the Sanskrit Sindhu, or "river," but especially the Indus river and, by implication, its well-settled southern basin.[20][21] The ancient Greeks referred to the Indians as Indoi (Ἰνδοί ), which translates as "The people of the Indus".[22]

The term Bharat (Bhārat; pronounced [ˈbʱaːɾət]  ([Image: About this sound]   listen  ) ), mentioned in both Indian epic poetry and the Constitution of India,[23][24] is used in its variations by many Indian languages. A modern rendering of the historical name Bharatavarsha, which applied originally to a region of the Gangetic Valley,[25][26] Bharat gained increased currency from the mid-19th century as a native name for India.[23][27]

Hindustan ([ɦɪndʊˈstaːn]  ([Image: About this sound]   listen  ) ) is a Middle Persian name for India, introduced during the Mughal Empire and used widely since. Its meaning has varied, referring to a region encompassing present-day northern India and Pakistan or to India in its near entirety.[23][27][28]

History 
Main articles: History of India and History of the Republic of India
Ancient India 
By 55,000 years ago, the first modern humans, or Homo sapiens., had arrived on the Indian subcontinent from Africa, where they had earlier evolved.[29][30] [31] The earliest known modern human remains in South Asia date to about 30,000 years ago.[32] Nearly contemporaneous human rock art sites have been found in many parts of the Indian subcontinent, including at the Bhimbetka rock shelters in Madhya Pradesh.[33] After 6500 BCE, evidence for domestication of food crops and animals, construction of permanent structures, and storage of agricultural surplus, appeared in Mehrgarh and other sites in what is now Balochistan.[34] These gradually developed into the Indus Valley Civilisation,[35][34] the first urban culture in South Asia,[36] which flourished during 2500–1900 BCE in what is now Pakistan and western India.[37] Centred around cities such as Mohenjo-daro, Harappa, Dholavira, and Kalibangan, and relying on varied forms of subsistence, the civilization engaged robustly in crafts production and wide-ranging trade.[36]

During the period 2000–500 BCE, many regions of the subcontinent transitioned from the Chalcolithic cultures to the Iron Age ones.[38] The Vedas, the oldest scriptures associated with Hinduism,[39] were composed during this period,[40] and historians have analysed these to posit a Vedic culture in the Punjab region and the upper Gangetic Plain.[38] Most historians also consider this period to have encompassed several waves of Indo-Aryan migration into the subcontinent from the north-west.[39] The caste system, which created a hierarchy of priests, warriors, and free peasants, but which excluded indigenous peoples by labeling their occupations impure, arose during this period.[41] On the Deccan Plateau, archaeological evidence from this period suggests the existence of a chiefdom stage of political organisation.[38] In South India, a progression to sedentary life is indicated by the large number of megalithic monuments dating from this period,[42] as well as by nearby traces of agriculture, irrigation tanks, and craft traditions.[42]

[Image: Damaged brown painting of a reclining man and woman.]  
Paintings at the Ajanta Caves in Aurangabad, Maharashtra, 6th century
In the late Vedic period, around the 6th century BCE, the small states and chiefdoms of the Ganges Plain and the north-western regions had consolidated into 16 major oligarchies and monarchies that were known as the mahajanapadas.[43][44] The emerging urbanisation gave rise to non-Vedic religious movements, two of which became independent religions. Jainism came into prominence during the life of its exemplar, Mahavira.[45] Buddhism, based on the teachings of Gautama Buddha, attracted followers from all social classes excepting the middle class; chronicling the life of the Buddha was central to the beginnings of recorded history in India.[46][47][48] In an age of increasing urban wealth, both religions held up renunciation as an ideal,[49] and both established long-lasting monastic traditions. Politically, by the 3rd century BCE, the kingdom of Magadha had annexed or reduced other states to emerge as the Mauryan Empire.[50] The empire was once thought to have controlled most of the subcontinent excepting the far south, but its core regions are now thought to have been separated by large autonomous areas.[51][52] The Mauryan kings are known as much for their empire-building and determined management of public life as for Ashoka's renunciation of militarism and far-flung advocacy of the Buddhist dhamma.[53][54]

The Sangam literature of the Tamil language reveals that, between 200 BCE and 200 CE, the southern peninsula was being ruled by the Cheras, the Cholas, and the Pandyas, dynasties that traded extensively with the Roman Empire and with West and South-East Asia.[55][56] In North India, Hinduism asserted patriarchal control within the family, leading to increased subordination of women.[57][50] By the 4th and 5th centuries, the Gupta Empire had created in the greater Ganges Plain a complex system of administration and taxation that became a model for later Indian kingdoms.[58][59] Under the Guptas, a renewed Hinduism based on devotion rather than the management of ritual began to assert itself.[60] The renewal was reflected in a flowering of sculpture and architecture, which found patrons among an urban elite.[59] Classical Sanskrit literature flowered as well, and Indian science, astronomy, medicine, and mathematics made significant advances.[59]

Medieval India 
The granite tower of Brihadeeswarar Temple in Thanjavur was completed in 1010 CE by Raja Raja Chola I.
The Indian early medieval age, 600 CE to 1200 CE, is defined by regional kingdoms and cultural diversity.[61] When Harsha of Kannauj, who ruled much of the Indo-Gangetic Plain from 606 to 647 CE, attempted to expand southwards, he was defeated by the Chalukya ruler of the Deccan.[62] When his successor attempted to expand eastwards, he was defeated by the Pala king of Bengal.[62] When the Chalukyas attempted to expand southwards, they were defeated by the Pallavas from farther south, who in turn were opposed by the Pandyas and the Cholas from still farther south.[62] No ruler of this period was able to create an empire and consistently control lands much beyond his core region.[61] During this time, pastoral peoples whose land had been cleared to make way for the growing agricultural economy were accommodated within caste society, as were new non-traditional ruling classes.[63] The caste system consequently began to show regional differences.[63]

In the 6th and 7th centuries, the first devotional hymns were created in the Tamil language.[64] They were imitated all over India and led to both the resurgence of Hinduism and the development of all modern languages of the subcontinent.[64] Indian royalty, big and small, and the temples they patronised drew citizens in great numbers to the capital cities, which became economic hubs as well.[65] Temple towns of various sizes began to appear everywhere as India underwent another urbanisation.[65] By the 8th and 9th centuries, the effects were felt in South-East Asia, as South Indian culture and political systems were exported to lands that became part of modern-day Myanmar, Thailand, Laos, Cambodia, Vietnam, Philippines, Malaysia, and Java.[66] Indian merchants, scholars, and sometimes armies were involved in this transmission; South-East Asians took the initiative as well, with many sojourning in Indian seminaries and translating Buddhist and Hindu texts into their languages.[66]

After the 10th century, Muslim Central Asian nomadic clans, using swift-horse cavalry and raising vast armies united by ethnicity and religion, repeatedly overran South Asia's north-western plains, leading eventually to the establishment of the Islamic Delhi Sultanate in 1206.[67] The sultanate was to control much of North India and to make many forays into South India. Although at first disruptive for the Indian elites, the sultanate largely left its vast non-Muslim subject population to its own laws and customs.[68][69] By repeatedly repulsing Mongol raiders in the 13th century, the sultanate saved India from the devastation visited on West and Central Asia, setting the scene for centuries of migration of fleeing soldiers, learned men, mystics, traders, artists, and artisans from that region into the subcontinent, thereby creating a syncretic Indo-Islamic culture in the north.[70][71] The sultanate's raiding and weakening of the regional kingdoms of South India paved the way for the indigenous Vijayanagara Empire.[72] Embracing a strong Shaivite tradition and building upon the military technology of the sultanate, the empire came to control much of peninsular India,[73] and was to influence South Indian society for long afterwards.[72]

Early modern India 
Writing the will and testament of the Mughal king in Persian, 1590–1595
In the early 16th century, northern India, being then under mainly Muslim rulers,[74] fell again to the superior mobility and firepower of a new generation of Central Asian warriors.[75] The resulting Mughal Empire did not stamp out the local societies it came to rule, but rather balanced and pacified them through new administrative practices[76][77] and diverse and inclusive ruling elites,[78] leading to more systematic, centralised, and uniform rule.[79] Eschewing tribal bonds and Islamic identity, especially under Akbar, the Mughals united their far-flung realms through loyalty, expressed through a Persianised culture, to an emperor who had near-divine status.[78] The Mughal state's economic policies, deriving most revenues from agriculture[80] and mandating that taxes be paid in the well-regulated silver currency,[81] caused peasants and artisans to enter larger markets.[79] The relative peace maintained by the empire during much of the 17th century was a factor in India's economic expansion,[79] resulting in greater patronage of painting, literary forms, textiles, and architecture.[82] Newly coherent social groups in northern and western India, such as the Marathas, the Rajputs, and the Sikhs, gained military and governing ambitions during Mughal rule, which, through collaboration or adversity, gave them both recognition and military experience.[83] Expanding commerce during Mughal rule gave rise to new Indian commercial and political elites along the coasts of southern and eastern India.[83] As the empire disintegrated, many among these elites were able to seek and control their own affairs.[84]

By the early 18th century, with the lines between commercial and political dominance being increasingly blurred, a number of European trading companies, including the English East India Company, had established coastal outposts.[85][86] The East India Company's control of the seas, greater resources, and more advanced military training and technology led it to increasingly flex its military muscle and caused it to become attractive to a portion of the Indian elite; these factors were crucial in allowing the company to gain control over the Bengal region by 1765 and sideline the other European companies.[87][85][88][89] Its further access to the riches of Bengal and the subsequent increased strength and size of its army enabled it to annex or subdue most of India by the 1820s.[90] India was then no longer exporting manufactured goods as it long had, but was instead supplying the British Empire with raw materials, and many historians consider this to be the onset of India's colonial period.[85] By this time, with its economic power severely curtailed by the British parliament and effectively having been made an arm of British administration, the company began to more consciously enter non-economic arenas such as education, social reform, and culture.[91]

Modern India 
Main article: History of the Republic of India
The British Indian Empire, from the 1909 edition of The Imperial Gazetteer of India. Areas directly governed by the British are shaded pink; the princely states under British suzerainty are in yellow.
Historians consider India's modern age to have begun sometime between 1848 and 1885. The appointment in 1848 of Lord Dalhousie as Governor General of the East India Company set the stage for changes essential to a modern state. These included the consolidation and demarcation of sovereignty, the surveillance of the population, and the education of citizens. Technological changes—among them, railways, canals, and the telegraph—were introduced not long after their introduction in Europe.[92][93][94][95] However, disaffection with the company also grew during this time, and set off the Indian Rebellion of 1857. Fed by diverse resentments and perceptions, including invasive British-style social reforms, harsh land taxes, and summary treatment of some rich landowners and princes, the rebellion rocked many regions of northern and central India and shook the foundations of Company rule.[96][97] Although the rebellion was suppressed by 1858, it led to the dissolution of the East India Company and the direct administration of India by the British government. Proclaiming a unitary state and a gradual but limited British-style parliamentary system, the new rulers also protected princes and landed gentry as a feudal safeguard against future unrest.[98][99] In the decades following, public life gradually emerged all over India, leading eventually to the founding of the Indian National Congress in 1885.[100][101][102][103]

The rush of technology and the commercialisation of agriculture in the second half of the 19th century was marked by economic setbacks—many small farmers became dependent on the whims of far-away markets.[104] There was an increase in the number of large-scale famines,[105] and, despite the risks of infrastructure development borne by Indian taxpayers, little industrial employment was generated for Indians.[106] There were also salutary effects: commercial cropping, especially in the newly canalled Punjab, led to increased food production for internal consumption.[107] The railway network provided critical famine relief,[108] notably reduced the cost of moving goods,[108] and helped the nascent Indian-owned industry.[107]

[Image: Jawaharlal Nehru sharing a joke with Mahatma Gandhi, Mumbai, 6 July 1946]  
Jawaharlal Nehru (left) became India's first prime minister in 1947. Mahatma Gandhi (right) led the independence movement.
After World War I, in which approximately one million Indians served,[109] a new period began. It was marked by British reforms but also repressive legislation, by more strident Indian calls for self-rule, and by the beginnings of a nonviolent movement of non-co-operation, of which Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi would become the leader and enduring symbol.[110] During the 1930s, slow legislative reform was enacted by the British; the Indian National Congress won victories in the resulting elections.[111] The next decade was beset with crises: Indian participation in World War II, the Congress's final push for non-co-operation, and an upsurge of Muslim nationalism. All were capped by the advent of independence in 1947, but tempered by the partition of India into two states: India and Pakistan.[112]

Vital to India's self-image as an independent nation was its constitution, completed in 1950, which put in place a secular and democratic republic.[113] It has remained a democracy with civil liberties, an active Supreme Court, and a largely independent press.[114] Economic liberalisation, which was begun in the 1990s, has created a large urban middle class, transformed India into one of the world's fastest-growing economies,[115] and increased its geopolitical clout. Indian movies, music, and spiritual teachings play an increasing role in global culture.[114] Yet, India is also shaped by seemingly unyielding poverty, both rural and urban;[114] by religious and caste-related violence;[116] by Maoist-inspired Naxalite insurgencies;[117] and by separatism in Jammu and Kashmir and in Northeast India.[118] It has unresolved territorial disputes with China[119] and with Pakistan.[119] The India–Pakistan nuclear rivalry came to a head in 1998.[120] India's sustained democratic freedoms are unique among the world's newer nations; however, in spite of its recent economic successes, freedom from want for its disadvantaged population remains a goal yet to be achieved.[121]

Geography 
Main article: Geography of India
[Image: Map of India. Most of India is yellow (elevation 100–1000 m). Some areas in the south and mid-east are brown (above 1000 m). Major river valleys are green (below 100 m).]  
A topographic map of India
India comprises the bulk of the Indian subcontinent, lying atop the Indian tectonic plate, a part of the Indo-Australian Plate.[122] India's defining geological processes began 75 million years ago when the Indian plate, then part of the southern supercontinent Gondwana, began a north-eastward drift caused by seafloor spreading to its south-west, and later, south and south-east.[122] Simultaneously, the vast Tethyn oceanic crust, to its northeast, began to subduct under the Eurasian plate.[122] These dual processes, driven by convection in the Earth's mantle, both created the Indian Ocean and caused the Indian continental crust eventually to under-thrust Eurasia and to uplift the Himalayas.[122] Immediately south of the emerging Himalayas, plate movement created a vast trough that rapidly filled with river-borne sediment[123] and now constitutes the Indo-Gangetic Plain.[124] Cut off from the plain by the ancient Aravalli Range lies the Thar Desert.[125]

The original Indian plate survives as peninsular India, the oldest and geologically most stable part of India. It extends as far north as the Satpura and Vindhya ranges in central India. These parallel chains run from the Arabian Sea coast in Gujarat in the west to the coal-rich Chota Nagpur Plateau in Jharkhand in the east.[126] To the south, the remaining peninsular landmass, the Deccan Plateau, is flanked on the west and east by coastal ranges known as the Western and Eastern Ghats;[127] the plateau contains the country's oldest rock formations, some over one billion years old. Constituted in such fashion, India lies to the north of the equator between 6° 44' and 35° 30' north latitude[g] and 68° 7' and 97° 25' east longitude.[128]

[Image: A shining white snow-clad range, framed against a turquoise sky. In the middle ground, a ridge descends from the right to form a saddle in the centre of the photograph, partly in shadow. In the near foreground, a loop of a road is seen.]  
The Kedar Range of the Greater Himalayas rises behind Kedarnath Temple (Indian state of Uttarakhand), which is one of the twelve jyotirlinga shrines.
India's coastline measures 7,517 kilometres (4,700 mi) in length; of this distance, 5,423 kilometres (3,400 mi) belong to peninsular India and 2,094 kilometres (1,300 mi) to the Andaman, Nicobar, and Lakshadweep island chains.[129] According to the Indian naval hydrographic charts, the mainland coastline consists of the following: 43% sandy beaches; 11% rocky shores, including cliffs; and 46% mudflats or marshy shores.[129]

Major Himalayan-origin rivers that substantially flow through India include the Ganges and the Brahmaputra, both of which drain into the Bay of Bengal.[130] Important tributaries of the Ganges include the Yamuna and the Kosi; the latter's extremely low gradient often leads to severe floods and course changes.[131] Major peninsular rivers, whose steeper gradients prevent their waters from flooding, include the Godavari, the Mahanadi, the Kaveri, and the Krishna, which also drain into the Bay of Bengal;[132] and the Narmada and the Tapti, which drain into the Arabian Sea.[133] Coastal features include the marshy Rann of Kutch of western India and the alluvial Sundarbans delta of eastern India; the latter is shared with Bangladesh.[134] India has two archipelagos: the Lakshadweep, coral atolls off India's south-western coast; and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, a volcanic chain in the Andaman Sea.[135]

The Indian climate is strongly influenced by the Himalayas and the Thar Desert, both of which drive the economically and culturally pivotal summer and winter monsoons.[136] The Himalayas prevent cold Central Asian katabatic winds from blowing in, keeping the bulk of the Indian subcontinent warmer than most locations at similar latitudes.[137][138] The Thar Desert plays a crucial role in attracting the moisture-laden south-west summer monsoon winds that, between June and October, provide the majority of India's rainfall.[136] Four major climatic groupings predominate in India: tropical wet, tropical dry, subtropical humid, and montane.[139]

Biodiversity 
Main articles: Forestry in India and Wildlife of India
The lotus (Nelumbo nucifera) is the Indian national flower. Hindus and Buddhists regard it as a sacred symbol of enlightenment.[140]
India is a megadiverse country, a term employed for countries, numbering 17, that display high biological diversity and contain many species exclusively indigenous, or endemic, to them.[141] India is a habitat for 8.6% of all mammal species, 13.7% of bird species, 7.9% of reptile species, 6% of amphibian species, 12.2% of fish species, and 6.0% of all flowering plant species.[142][143] Fully third of Indian plant species are endemic.[144] India also contains four of the world's 34 biodiversity hotspots,[19] or regions that display significant habitat loss in the presence of high endemism.[h][145]

India's forest cover is 701,673 km2 (270,917 sq mi), which is 21.35% of the country's total land area, can be subdivided further into:[146]

    Very dense forest, whose canopy density[i] is greater than 70%, occupies 2.61% of India's land area.[146] It predominates in the tropical moist forest of the Andaman Islands, the Western Ghats, and Northeast India.[147]
    Moderately dense forest, whose canopy density is between 40% and 70%, occupies 9.59% of India's land area,[146] and predominates in the temperate coniferous forest of the Himalayas, the moist deciduous sal forest of eastern India, and the dry deciduous teak forest of central and southern India.[147]
    Open forest, whose canopy density is between 10% and 40%, occupies 9.14% of India's land area,[146] and predominates in the babul-dominated thorn forest of the central Deccan plateau and the western Gangetic plain.[147]

Among the notable trees that are indigenous to the Indian subcontinent, are the astringent Azadirachta indica, or neem, which is widely used in rural Indian herbal medicine,[148] and the luxuriant Ficus religiosa, or peepul,[149] which is displayed on the ancient seals of Mohenjo-daro,[150] and under which the Buddha is recorded in the Pali canon to have sought enlightenment,[151]

Many Indian species have descended from those of Gondwana, the southern supercontinent from which India separated more than 100 million years ago.[152] India's subsequent collision with Eurasia set off a mass exchange of species. However, volcanism and climatic changes later caused the extinction of many endemic Indian forms.[153] Still later, mammals entered India from Asia through two zoogeographical passes flanking the Himalaya.[147] This had the effect of lowering endemism among India's mammals, which stands at 12.6%, contrasting with 45.8% among reptiles and 55.8% among amphibians.[143] Notable endemics are the vulnerable[154] Hooded leaf monkey[155] and the threatened[156] Beddom's toad[156][157] of the Western Ghats.

India contains 172 IUCN-designated threatened animal species, or 2.9% of endangered forms.[158] These include the endangered Ganges river dolphin and the critically endangered: Gharial, a crocodilian; the Great Indian bustard; and the Indian white-rumped vulture, which has become nearly extinct by having ingested the carrion of diclofenac-treated cattle.[159] The pervasive and ecologically devastating human encroachment of recent decades has critically endangered Indian wildlife. In response, the system of national parks and protected areas, first established in 1935, was substantially expanded. In 1972, India enacted the Wildlife Protection Act[160] and Project Tiger to safeguard crucial wilderness; the Forest Conservation Act was enacted in 1980 and amendments added in 1988.[161] India hosts more than five hundred wildlife sanctuaries and thirteen  biosphere reserves,[162] four of which are part of the World Network of Biosphere Reserves; twenty-five wetlands are registered under the Ramsar Convention.[163]

Politics and government  Politics 
Main article: Politics of India
A parliamentary joint session being held in the Sansad Bhavan.
India is the world's most populous democracy.[164] A parliamentary republic with a multi-party system,[165] it has seven  recognised national parties, including the Indian National Congress and the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), and more than 40  regional parties.[166] The Congress is considered centre-left in Indian political culture,[167] and the BJP right-wing.[168][169][170] For most of the period between 1950—when India first became a republic—and the late 1980s, the Congress held a majority in the parliament. Since then, however, it has increasingly shared the political stage with the BJP,[171] as well as with powerful regional parties which have often forced the creation of multi-party coalition governments at the centre.[172]

In the Republic of India's first three general elections, in 1951, 1957, and 1962, the Jawaharlal Nehru-led Congress won easy victories. On Nehru's death in 1964, Lal Bahadur Shastri briefly became prime minister; he was succeeded, after his own unexpected death in 1966, by Indira Gandhi, who went on to lead the Congress to election victories in 1967 and 1971. Following public discontent with the state of emergency she declared in 1975, the Congress was voted out of power in 1977; the then-new Janata Party, which had opposed the emergency, was voted in. Its government lasted just over two years. Voted back into power in 1980, the Congress saw a change in leadership in 1984, when Indira Gandhi was assassinated; she was succeeded by her son Rajiv Gandhi, who won an easy victory in the general elections later that year. The Congress was voted out again in 1989 when a National Front coalition, led by the newly formed Janata Dal in alliance with the Left Front, won the elections; that government too proved relatively short-lived, lasting just under two years.[173] Elections were held again in 1991; no party won an absolute majority. The Congress, as the largest single party, was able to form a minority government led by P. V. Narasimha Rao.[174]

The Rashtrapati Bhavan is the official residence of the President of India.
A two-year period of political turmoil followed the general election of 1996. Several short-lived alliances shared power at the centre. The BJP formed a government briefly in 1996; it was followed by two comparatively long-lasting United Front coalitions, which depended on external support. In 1998, the BJP was able to form a successful coalition, the National Democratic Alliance (NDA). Led by Atal Bihari Vajpayee, the NDA became the first non-Congress, coalition government to complete a five-year term.[175] In the 2004 Indian general elections, again no party won an absolute majority, but the Congress emerged as the largest single party, forming another successful coalition: the United Progressive Alliance (UPA). It had the support of left-leaning parties and MPs who opposed the BJP. The UPA returned to power in the 2009 general election with increased numbers, and it no longer required external support from India's communist parties.[176] That year, Manmohan Singh became the first prime minister since Jawaharlal Nehru in 1957 and 1962 to be re-elected to a consecutive five-year term.[177] In the 2014 general election, the BJP became the first political party since 1984 to win a majority and govern without the support of other parties.[178] The incumbent Indian prime minister is Narendra Modi, a former chief minister of Gujarat. On 20 July 2017, Ram Nath Kovind was elected India's 14th president and took the oath of office on 25 July 2017.[179][180][181]

Government 
Main articles: Government of India and Constitution of India
India is a federation with a parliamentary system governed under the Constitution of India, which serves as the country's supreme legal document. It is a constitutional republic and representative democracy, in which "majority rule is tempered by minority rights protected by law". Federalism in India defines the power distribution between the union, or central, government and the states. The Constitution of India, which came into effect on 26 January 1950,[182] originally stated India to be a "sovereign, democratic republic;" this characterization was amended in 1971 to "a sovereign, socialist, secular, democratic republic.[183] India's form of government, traditionally described as "quasi-federal" with a strong centre and weak states,[184] has grown increasingly federal since the late 1990s as a result of political, economic, and social changes.[185][186]

National symbols[1]FlagTiranga (Tricolour)EmblemSarnath Lion CapitalLanguageNone[9][10][11]AnthemJana Gana ManaSongVande MataramCurrency₹ (Indian rupee)CalendarSakaAnimalTiger (land)
River dolphin (aquatic)BirdIndian peafowlFlowerLotusFruitMangoTreeBanyanRiverGangaGameNot declared[187]
The Government of India comprises three branches:[188]

    Executive: The President of India is the ceremonial head of state,[189] who is elected indirectly for a five-year term by an electoral college comprising members of national and state legislatures.[190][191] The Prime Minister of India is the head of government and exercises most executive power.[192] Appointed by the president,[193] the prime minister is by convention supported by the party or political alliance having a majority of seats in the lower house of parliament.[192] The executive of the Indian government consists of the president, the vice president, and the Union Council of Ministers—with the cabinet being its executive committee—headed by the prime minister. Any minister holding a portfolio must be a member of one of the houses of parliament.[189] In the Indian parliamentary system, the executive is subordinate to the legislature; the prime minister and his or her council are directly responsible to the lower house of the parliament. The civil servants act as permanent executives and all decisions of the executive are implemented by them. [194]
    Legislature: The legislature of India is the bicameral parliament. Operating under a Westminster-style parliamentary system, it comprises an upper house called the Rajya Sabha (Council of States) and a lower house called the Lok Sabha (House of the People).[195] The Rajya Sabha is a permanent body of 245  members who serve staggered six-year  terms.[196] Most are elected indirectly by the state and union territorial legislatures in numbers proportional to their state's share of the national population.[193] All but two of the Lok Sabha's 545  members are directly elected by popular vote; they represent single-member constituencies for five-year  terms.[197] The remaining two  members are nominated by the president from among the Anglo-Indian community, in case the president decides that they are not adequately represented.[198]
    Judiciary: India has a three-tier  unitary independent judiciary[199] comprising the supreme court, headed by the Chief Justice of India, 24  high courts, and a large number of trial courts.[199] The supreme court has original jurisdiction over cases involving fundamental rights and over disputes between states and the centre and has appellate jurisdiction over the high courts.[200] It has the power to both strike down union or state laws which contravene the constitution,[201] and invalidate any government action it deems unconstitutional.[202]

Administrative divisions 
Main article: Administrative divisions of India
See also: Political integration of India
A clickable map of the 29 states and 7 union territories of India
States (1–29) & Union territories (A-G) 1. Andhra Pradesh 19. Nagaland 2. Arunachal Pradesh 20. Odisha 3. Assam 21. Punjab 4. Bihar 22. Rajasthan 5. Chhattisgarh 23. Sikkim 6. Goa 24. Tamil Nadu 7. Gujarat 25. Telangana 8. Haryana 26. Tripura 9. Himachal Pradesh 27. Uttar Pradesh 10. Jammu and Kashmir 28. Uttarakhand 11. Jharkhand 29. West Bengal 12. Karnataka A. Andaman and Nicobar Islands 13. Kerala B. Chandigarh 14. Madhya Pradesh C. Dadra and Nagar Haveli 15. Maharashtra D. Daman and Diu 16. Manipur E. Lakshadweep 17. Meghalaya F. National Capital Territory of Delhi 18. Mizoram G. Puducherry
India is a federal union comprising 29 states and 7 union territories.[203] All states, as well in addition to the union territories of Puducherry and the National Capital Territory of Delhi, have elected legislatures and governments following on the Westminster system of governance. The remaining five union territories are directly ruled by the centre through appointed administrators. In 1956, under the States Reorganisation Act, states were reorganised on a linguistic basis.[204] Since then, their structure has remained largely unchanged. Each state or union territory is further divided into administrative districts. The districts are further divided into tehsils and ultimately into villages.

 Foreign, economic and strategic relations 
Main articles: Foreign relations of India and Indian Armed Forces
Since its independence in 1947, India has maintained cordial relations with most nations. In the 1950s, it strongly supported decolonisation in Africa and Asia and played a lead role in the Non-Aligned Movement.[205] In the late 1980s, the Indian military twice intervened abroad at the invitation of neighbouring countries: a peace-keeping operation in Sri Lanka between 1987 and 1990; and an armed intervention to prevent a 1988 coup d'état attempt in the Maldives. India has tense relations with neighbouring Pakistan; the two nations have gone to war four times: in 1947, 1965, 1971, and 1999. Three of these wars were fought over the disputed territory of Kashmir, while the fourth, the 1971 war, followed from India's support for the independence of Bangladesh.[206] After waging the 1962 Sino-Indian War and the 1965 war with Pakistan, India pursued close military and economic ties with the Soviet Union; by the late 1960s, the Soviet Union was its largest arms supplier.[207]

Aside from ongoing special relationship with Russia,[208] India has wide-ranging defence relations with Israel and France. In recent years, it has played key roles in the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation and the World Trade Organization. The nation has provided 100,000 military and police personnel to serve in 35 UN peacekeeping operations across four continents. It participates in the East Asia Summit, the G8+5, and other multilateral forums.[209] India has close economic ties with South America,[210] Asia, and Africa; it pursues a "Look East" policy that seeks to strengthen partnerships with the ASEAN nations, Japan, and South Korea that revolve around many issues, but especially those involving economic investment and regional security.[211][212]

INS Vikramaditya, the Indian Navy's biggest warship.
China's nuclear test of 1964, as well as its repeated threats to intervene in support of Pakistan in the 1965 war, convinced India to develop nuclear weapons.[213] India conducted its first nuclear weapons test in 1974 and carried out further underground testing in 1998. Despite criticism and military sanctions, India has signed neither the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty nor the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, considering both to be flawed and discriminatory.[214] India maintains a "no first use" nuclear policy and is developing a nuclear triad capability as a part of its "Minimum Credible Deterrence" doctrine.[215][216] It is developing a ballistic missile defence shield and, in collaboration with Russia, a fifth-generation fighter jet.[217] Other indigenous military projects involve the design and implementation of Vikrant-class aircraft carriers and Arihant-class nuclear submarines.[217]

Since the end of the Cold War, India has increased its economic, strategic, and military co-operation with the United States and the European Union.[218] In 2008, a civilian nuclear agreement was signed between India and the United States. Although India possessed nuclear weapons at the time and was not party to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, it received waivers from the International Atomic Energy Agency and the Nuclear Suppliers Group, ending earlier restrictions on India's nuclear technology and commerce. As a consequence, India became the sixth de facto nuclear weapons state.[219] India subsequently signed co-operation agreements involving civilian nuclear energy with Russia,[220] France,[221] the United Kingdom,[222] and Canada.[223]

Leaders of the BRICS nations
The President of India is the supreme commander of the nation's armed forces; with 1.395 million active troops, they compose the world's second-largest military. It comprises the Indian Army, the Indian Navy, the Indian Air Force, and the Indian Coast Guard.[224] The official Indian defence budget for 2011 was US$36.03 billion, or 1.83% of GDP.[225] For the fiscal year spanning 2012–2013, US$40.44 billion was budgeted.[226] According to a 2008 SIPRI report, India's annual military expenditure in terms of purchasing power stood at US$72.7 billion.[227] In 2011, the annual defence budget increased by 11.6%,[228] although this does not include funds that reach the military through other branches of government.[229] As of 2012[update], India is the world's largest arms importer; between 2007 and 2011, it accounted for 10% of funds spent on international arms purchases.[230] Much of the military expenditure was focused on defence against Pakistan and countering growing Chinese influence in the Indian Ocean.[228] In May 2017, the Indian Space Research Organisation launched the South Asia Satellite, a gift from India to its neighbouring SAARC countries.[231] In October 2018, India signed a US$5.43 billion (over Rs 400 billion) agreement with Russia to procure four S-400 Triumf surface-to-air missile defence systems, Russia's most advanced long-range missile defence system.[232]

Economy 
Main article: Economy of India
See also: Economic History of India and Economic development in India
Fishermen on the Chinese fishing nets of Cochin. Fisheries in India is a major industry in its coastal states, employing over 14 million people. The annual catch doubled between 1990 and 2010.
According to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the Indian economy in 2017 was nominally worth US$2.611 trillion; it is the sixth-largest economy by market exchange rates, and is, at US$9.459 trillion, the third-largest by purchasing power parity, or PPP.[16] With its average annual GDP growth rate of 5.8% over the past two decades, and reaching 6.1% during 2011–12,[233] India is one of the world's fastest-growing economies.[234] However, the country ranks 140th in the world in nominal GDP per capita and 129th in GDP per capita at PPP.[235] Until 1991, all Indian governments followed protectionist policies that were influenced by socialist economics. Widespread state intervention and regulation largely walled the economy off from the outside world. An acute balance of payments crisis in 1991 forced the nation to liberalise its economy;[236] since then it has slowly moved towards a free-market system[237][238] by emphasising both foreign trade and direct investment inflows.[239] India has been a member of WTO since 1 January 1995.[240]

The 513.7-million-worker Indian labour force is the world's second-largest, as of 2016[update].[224] The service sector makes up 55.6% of GDP, the industrial sector 26.3% and the agricultural sector 18.1%. India's foreign exchange remittances of US$70 billion in 2014, the largest in the world, contributed to its economy by 25 million Indians working in foreign countries.[241] Major agricultural products include rice, wheat, oilseed, cotton, jute, tea, sugarcane, and potatoes.[203] Major industries include textiles, telecommunications, chemicals, pharmaceuticals, biotechnology, food processing, steel, transport equipment, cement, mining, petroleum, machinery, and software.[203] In 2006, the share of external trade in India's GDP stood at 24%, up from 6% in 1985.[237] In 2008, India's share of world trade was 1.68%;[242] In 2011, India was the world's tenth-largest importer and the nineteenth-largest exporter.[243] Major exports include petroleum products, textile goods, jewellery, software, engineering goods, chemicals, and leather manufactures.[203] Major imports include crude oil, machinery, gems, fertiliser, and chemicals.[203] Between 2001 and 2011, the contribution of petrochemical and engineering goods to total exports grew from 14% to 42%.[244] India was the second largest textile exporter after China in the world in the calendar year 2013.[245]

Averaging an economic growth rate of 7.5% for several years prior to 2007,[237] India has more than doubled its hourly wage rates during the first decade of the 21st century.[246] Some 431 million Indians have left poverty since 1985; India's middle classes are projected to number around 580 million by 2030.[247] Though ranking 51st in global competitiveness, India ranks 17th in financial market sophistication, 24th in the banking sector, 44th in business sophistication, and 39th in innovation, ahead of several advanced economies, as of 2010[update].[248] With 7 of the world's top 15 information technology outsourcing companies based in India, the country is viewed as the second-most favourable outsourcing destination after the United States, as of 2009[update].[249] India's consumer market, the world's eleventh-largest, is expected to become fifth-largest by 2030.[247] However, hardly 2% of Indians pay income taxes.[250]

Driven by growth, India's nominal GDP per capita has steadily increased from US$329 in 1991, when economic liberalisation began, to US$1,265 in 2010, to an estimated US$1,723 in 2016, and is expected to grow to US$2,358 by 2020;[16] however, it has remained lower than those of other Asian developing countries such as Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Sri Lanka, and Thailand, and is expected to remain so in the near future. However, it is higher than Pakistan, Nepal, Afghanistan, Bangladesh and others.[251]

According to a 2011 PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) report, India's GDP at purchasing power parity could overtake that of the United States by 2045.[252] During the next four decades, Indian GDP is expected to grow at an annualised average of 8%, making it potentially the world's fastest-growing major economy until 2050.[252] The report highlights key growth factors: a young and rapidly growing working-age population; growth in the manufacturing sector because of rising education and engineering skill levels; and sustained growth of the consumer market driven by a rapidly growing middle-class.[252] The World Bank cautions that, for India to achieve its economic potential, it must continue to focus on public sector reform, transport infrastructure, agricultural and rural development, removal of labour regulations, education, energy security, and public health and nutrition.[253]

According to the Worldwide Cost of Living Report 2017 released by the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) which was created by comparing more than 400 individual prices across 160 products and services, four of the cheapest cities were in India: Bangalore (3rd), Mumbai (5th), Chennai (5th) and New Delhi (8th).[254]

Industries 
Power Loom used inside a house in a village near Salem, Tamil Nadu. The Power loom accounts for more than 60% of textile production in India.
India's telecommunication industry, the world's fastest-growing, added 227 million subscribers during the period 2010–11,[255] and after the third quarter of 2017, India surpassed the US to become the second largest smartphone market in the world after China.[256]

The Indian automotive industry, the world's second-fastest growing, increased domestic sales by 26% during 2009–10,[257] and exports by 36% during 2008–09.[258] India's capacity to generate electrical power is 300 gigawatts, of which 42 gigawatts is renewable.[259] At the end of 2011, the Indian IT industry employed 2.8 million professionals, generated revenues close to US$100 billion equalling 7.5% of Indian GDP and contributed 26% of India's merchandise exports.[260]

The pharmaceutical industry in India is among the significant emerging markets for the global pharmaceutical industry. The Indian pharmaceutical market is expected to reach $48.5 billion by 2020. India's R & D spending constitutes 60% of the biopharmaceutical industry.[261][262] India is among the top 12 biotech destinations in the world.[263][264] The Indian biotech industry grew by 15.1% in 2012–13, increasing its revenues from 204.4 billion INR (Indian rupees) to 235.24 billion INR (3.94 B US$ – exchange rate June 2013: 1 US$ approx. 60 INR).[265]

Socio-economic challenges 
Despite economic growth during recent decades, India continues to face socio-economic challenges. In 2006, India contained the largest number of people living below the World Bank's international poverty line of US$1.25 per day,[266] the proportion having decreased from 60% in 1981 to 42% in 2005;[267] under its later revised poverty line, it was 21% in 2011.[j][269] 30.7% of India's children under the age of five are underweight.[270] According to a Food and Agriculture Organization report in 2015, 15% of the population is undernourished.[271][272] The Mid-Day Meal Scheme attempts to lower these rates.[273]

According to a Walk Free Foundation report in 2016, there were an estimated 18.3 million people in India, or 1.4% of the population, living in the forms of modern slavery, such as bonded labour, child labour, human trafficking, and forced begging, among others.[274][275][276] According to the 2011 census, there were 10.1 million child labourers in the country, a decline of 2.6 million from 12.6 million child labourers in 2001.[277]

Since 1991, economic inequality between India's states has consistently grown: the per-capita net state domestic product of the richest states in 2007 was 3.2 times that of the poorest.[278] Corruption in India is perceived to have decreased. According to the Corruption Perceptions Index, India ranked 78th out of 180 countries in 2018 with a score of 41 out of 100, an improvement from 85th in 2014.[279][280]

 Demographics, languages, and religion 
Main articles: Demographics of India, Languages of India, and Religion in India
The population density map of India by states, districts, and people per km2 based on the 2011 Census of India.
With 1,210,193,422 residents reported in the 2011 provisional census report,[281] India is the world's second-most populous country. Its population grew by 17.64% during 2001–2011,[282] compared to 21.54% growth in the previous decade (1991–2001).[282] The human sex ratio, according to the 2011 census, is 940 females per 1,000 males.[281] The median age was 27.6 as of 2016[update].[224] The first post-colonial census, conducted in 1951, counted 361.1 million people.[283] Medical advances made in the last 50 years as well as increased agricultural productivity brought about by the "Green Revolution" have caused India's population to grow rapidly.[284] India continues to face several public health-related challenges.[285][286]

Life expectancy in India is at 68 years, with life expectancy for women being 69.6 years and for men being 67.3.[287] There are around 50 physicians per 100,000 Indians.[288] Migration from rural to urban areas has been an important dynamic in the recent history of India. The number of Indians living in urban areas grew by 31.2% between 1991 and 2001.[289] Yet, in 2001, over 70% still lived in rural areas.[290][291] The level of urbanisation increased further from 27.81% in the 2001 Census to 31.16% in the 2011 Census. The slowing down of the overall growth rate of population was due to the sharp decline in the growth rate in rural areas since 1991.[292] According to the 2011 census, there are 53 million-plus urban agglomerations in India; among them Mumbai, Delhi, Kolkata, Chennai, Bangalore, Hyderabad and Ahmedabad, in decreasing order by population.[293] The literacy rate in 2011 was 74.04%: 65.46% among females and 82.14% among males.[294] The rural-urban literacy gap, which was 21.2 percentage points in 2001, dropped to 16.1 percentage points in 2011. The improvement in literacy rate in rural area is two times that in urban areas.[292] Kerala is the most literate state with 93.91% literacy; while Bihar the least with 63.82%.[294]

Although Hindi is the official language of India, Telugu is the official language of the state of Telangana, with Urdu its second official language.[295] Shown here is a handicraft seller in Hyderabad, Telangana
India is home to two major language families: Indo-Aryan (spoken by about 74% of the population) and Dravidian (spoken by 24% of the population). Other languages spoken in India come from the Austroasiatic and Sino-Tibetan language families. India has no national language.[296] Hindi, with the largest number of speakers, is the official language of the government.[297][298] English is used extensively in business and administration and has the status of a "subsidiary official language";[5] it is important in education, especially as a medium of higher education. Each state and union territory has one or more official languages, and the constitution recognises in particular 22 "scheduled languages".

The 2011 census reported that the religion in India with the largest number of followers was Hinduism (79.80% of the population), followed by Islam (14.23%); the remaining were Christianity (2.30%), Sikhism (1.72%), Buddhism (0.70%), Jainism (0.36%) and others[c] (0.9%).[12] India has the world's largest Hindu, Sikh, Jain, Zoroastrian, and Bahá'í populations, and has the third-largest Muslim population—the largest for a non-Muslim majority country.[299][300]

Culture 
Main article: Culture of India
A sculpture fashioned in the Gandharan tradition depicting Gautama Buddha, founder of Buddhism, at the Tokyo National Museum
Indian cultural history spans more than 4,500  years.[301] During the Vedic period (c. 1700  – c. 500  BCE ), the foundations of Hindu philosophy, mythology, theology and literature were laid, and many beliefs and practices which still exist today, such as dhárma, kárma, yóga, and mokṣa, were established.[22] India is notable for its religious diversity, with Hinduism, Buddhism, Sikhism, Islam, Christianity, and Jainism among the nation's major religions.[302] The predominant religion, Hinduism, has been shaped by various historical schools of thought, including those of the Upanishads,[303] the Yoga Sutras, the Bhakti movement,[302] and by Buddhist philosophy.[304]

 Art, architecture and literature 
Main articles: Architecture of India and Indian literature
Much of Indian architecture, including the Taj Mahal, other works of Mughal architecture, and South Indian architecture, blends ancient local traditions with imported styles.[305] Vernacular architecture is also highly regional in it flavours. Vastu shastra, literally "science of construction" or "architecture" and ascribed to Mamuni Mayan,[306] explores how the laws of nature affect human dwellings;[307] it employs precise geometry and directional alignments to reflect perceived cosmic constructs.[308] As applied in Hindu temple architecture, it is influenced by the Shilpa Shastras, a series of foundational texts whose basic mythological form is the Vastu-Purusha mandala, a square that embodied the "absolute".[309] The Taj Mahal, built in Agra between 1631 and 1648 by orders of Emperor Shah Jahan in memory of his wife, has been described in the UNESCO World Heritage List as "the jewel of Muslim art in India and one of the universally admired masterpieces of the world's heritage".[310] Indo-Saracenic Revival architecture, developed by the British in the late 19th century, drew on Indo-Islamic architecture.[311]

The earliest literature in India, composed between 1500 BCE and 1200 CE, was in the Sanskrit language.[312] Major works of Sanskrit literature include the Rigveda (c. 1500 BCE–1200 BCE), the epics:Mahābhārata (c. 400 BCE–400 CE) and the Ramayana (c. 300 BCE and later); Abhijñānaśākuntalam (The Recognition of Śakuntalā, and other dramas of Kālidāsa (c. 5th century CE) and Mahākāvya poetry.[313][314][315] In Tamil literature, Sangam Literature (c 600 BCE–300 BCE) consisting of 2,381 poems, composed by 473 poets, is the earliest work.[316][317][318][319] From the 14th to the 18th centuries, India's literary traditions went through a period of drastic change because of the emergence of devotional poets such as Kabīr, Tulsīdās, and Guru Nānak. This period was characterised by a varied and wide spectrum of thought and expression; as a consequence, medieval Indian literary works differed significantly from classical traditions.[320] In the 19th century, Indian writers took a new interest in social questions and psychological descriptions. In the 20th century, Indian literature was influenced by the works of Bengali poet and novelist Rabindranath Tagore,[321] who was a recipient of the Nobel Prize in Literature.

 Performing arts, and media 
A Kuchipudi dance performance is accompanied by Carnatic vocalisations.
Main articles: Music of India, Dance in India, Cinema of India, and Television in India
Indian music ranges over various traditions and regional styles. Classical music encompasses two genres and their various folk offshoots: the northern Hindustani and southern Carnatic schools.[322] Regionalised popular forms include filmi and folk music; the syncretic tradition of the bauls is a well-known form of the latter. Indian dance also features diverse folk and classical forms. Among the better-known folk dances are the bhangra of Punjab, the bihu of Assam, the Jhumair and chhau of Jharkhand, Odisha and West Bengal, garba and dandiya of Gujarat, ghoomar of Rajasthan, and the lavani of Maharashtra. Eight dance forms, many with narrative forms and mythological elements, have been accorded classical dance status by India's National Academy of Music, Dance, and Drama. These are: bharatanatyam of the state of Tamil Nadu, kathak of Uttar Pradesh, kathakali and mohiniyattam of Kerala, kuchipudi of Andhra Pradesh, manipuri of Manipur, odissi of Odisha, and the sattriya of Assam.[323] Theatre in India melds music, dance, and improvised or written dialogue.[324] Often based on Hindu mythology, but also borrowing from medieval romances or social and political events, Indian theatre includes the bhavai of Gujarat, the jatra of West Bengal, the nautanki and ramlila of North India, tamasha of Maharashtra, burrakatha of Andhra Pradesh, terukkuttu of Tamil Nadu, and the yakshagana of Karnataka.[325] India has a theatre training institute NSD that is situated at New Delhi It is an autonomous organisation under the Ministry of Culture, Government of India.[326]

The Indian film industry produces the world's most-watched cinema.[327] Established regional cinematic traditions exist in the Assamese, Bengali, Bhojpuri, Hindi, Kannada, Malayalam, Punjabi, Gujarati, Marathi, Odia, Tamil, and Telugu languages.[328] South Indian cinema attracts more than 75% of national film revenue.[329]

Television broadcasting began in India in 1959 as a state-run medium of communication and had slow expansion for more than two decades.[330][331] The state monopoly on television broadcast ended in the 1990s and, since then, satellite channels have increasingly shaped the popular culture of Indian society.[332] Today, television is the most penetrative media in India; industry estimates indicate that as of 2012[update] there are over 554 million TV consumers, 462 million with satellite and/or cable connections, compared to other forms of mass media such as press (350 million), radio (156 million) or internet (37 million).[333]

 Society, clothing, and cuisine 
Main articles: Culture of India, Clothing in India, and Indian cuisine
A Christian wedding in Madurai, Tamil Nadu. Christianity is believed to have been introduced to India by the late 2nd century by Syriac-speaking Christians.
Traditional Indian society is sometimes defined by social hierarchy. The Indian caste system embodies much of the social stratification and many of the social restrictions found in the Indian subcontinent. Social classes are defined by thousands of endogamous hereditary groups, often termed as jātis, or "castes".[334] India declared untouchability to be illegal[335] in 1947 and has since enacted other anti-discriminatory laws and social welfare initiatives. At the workplace in urban India and in international or leading Indian companies, the caste related identification has pretty much lost its importance.[336][337]

Family values are important in the Indian tradition, and multi-generational patriarchal joint families have been the norm in India, though nuclear families are becoming common in urban areas.[338] An overwhelming majority of Indians, with their consent, have their marriages arranged by their parents or other elders in the family.[339] Marriage is thought to be for life,[339] and the divorce rate is extremely low.[340] As of 2001[update], just 1.6 percent of Indian women were divorced, but this figure was rising due to their education and economic independence.[340] Child marriages are common, especially in rural areas; many women wed before reaching 18, which is their legal marriageable age.[341] Female infanticide and female foeticide in the country have caused a discrepancy in the sex ratio, as of 2005[update] it was estimated that there were 50 million more males than females in the nation.[342][343] However, a report from 2011 has shown improvement in the gender ratio.[344] The payment of dowry, although illegal, remains widespread across class lines.[345] Deaths resulting from dowry, mostly from bride burning, are on the rise, despite stringent anti-dowry laws.[346]

An assortment of Indian spices
Many Indian festivals are religious in origin. The best known include Diwali, Ganesh Chaturthi, Thai Pongal, Holi, Durga Puja, Eid ul-Fitr, Bakr-Id, Christmas, and Vaisakhi.[347][348]

Cotton was domesticated in India by 4000 BCE. Traditional Indian dress varies in colour and style across regions and depends on various factors, including climate and faith. Popular styles of dress include draped garments such as the sari for women and the dhoti or lungi for men. Stitched clothes, such as the shalwar kameez for women and kurta–pyjama combinations or European-style trousers and shirts for men, are also popular.[349] Use of delicate jewellery, modelled on real flowers worn in ancient India, is part of a tradition dating back some 5,000 years; gemstones are also worn in India as talismans.[350]

Indian cuisine encompasses a wide variety of regional and traditional cuisines, often depending on a particular state (such as Maharashtrian cuisine). Staple foods of Indian cuisine include pearl millet (ISO: bājra), rice, whole-wheat flour (aṭṭa), and a variety of lentils, such as masoor (most often red lentils), toor (pigeon peas), urad (black gram), and mong (mung beans). Lentils may be used whole, dehusked—for example, dhuli moong or dhuli urad—or split. Split lentils, or dal, are used extensively.[351] The spice trade between India and Europe is often cited by historians as the primary catalyst for Europe's Age of Discovery.[352]

Sports and recreation 
Main article: Sport in India
A game of kabaddi in Bagepalli, Karnataka
In India, several traditional indigenous sports remain fairly popular, such as kabaddi, kho kho, pehlwani and gilli-danda. Some of the earliest forms of Asian martial arts, such as kalarippayattu, musti yuddha, silambam, and marma adi, originated in India. Chess, commonly held to have originated in India as chaturaṅga, is regaining widespread popularity with the rise in the number of Indian grandmasters.[353][354] Pachisi, from which parcheesi derives, was played on a giant marble court by Akbar.[355]

The improved results garnered by the Indian Davis Cup team and other Indian tennis players in the early 2010s have made tennis increasingly popular in the country.[356] India has a comparatively strong presence in shooting sports, and has won several medals at the Olympics, the World Shooting Championships, and the Commonwealth Games.[357][358] Other sports in which Indians have succeeded internationally include badminton[359] (Saina Nehwal and P V Sindhu are two of the top-ranked female badminton players in the world), boxing,[360] and wrestling.[361] Football is popular in West Bengal, Goa, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, and the north-eastern states.[362]

Cricket is the most popular sport in India.[363] Major domestic competitions include the Indian Premier League, which is the most-watched cricket league in the world and ranks sixth among all sports leagues.[364]

India has hosted or co-hosted several international sporting events: the 1951 and 1982 Asian Games; the 1987, 1996, and 2011 Cricket World Cup tournaments; the 2003 Afro-Asian Games; the 2006 ICC Champions Trophy; the 2010 Hockey World Cup; the 2010 Commonwealth Games; and the 2017 FIFA U-17 World Cup. Major international sporting events held annually in India include the Chennai Open, the Mumbai Marathon, the Delhi Half Marathon, and the Indian Masters. The first Formula 1 Indian Grand Prix featured in late 2011 but has been discontinued from the F1 season calendar since 2014.[365] India has traditionally been the dominant country at the South Asian Games. An example of this dominance is the basketball competition where the Indian team won three out of four tournaments to date.[366]

See also 

    [Image: flag]   India portal 

    Outline of India
    Index of India-related articles

Notes 

    ^  "[...] Jana Gana Mana is the National Anthem of India, subject to such alterations in the words as the Government may authorise as occasion arises; and the song Vande Mataram, which has played a historic part in the struggle for Indian freedom, shall be honoured equally with Jana Gana Mana and shall have equal status with it." (Constituent Assembly of India 1950). 
    ^  According to Part XVII of the Constitution of India, Hindi in the Devanagari script is the official language of the Union, along with English as an additional official language.[5][1][6] States and union territories can have a different official language of their own other than Hindi or English. 
    ^ a b  Besides specific religions, the last two categories in the 2011 Census were "Other religions and persuasions" (0.65%) and "Religion not stated" (0.23%). 
    ^  "The country's exact size is subject to debate because some borders are disputed. The Indian government lists the total area as 3,287,260 km2 (1,269,220 sq mi) and the total land area as 3,060,500 km2 (1,181,700 sq mi); the United Nations lists the total area as 3,287,263 km2 (1,269,219 sq mi) and total land area as 2,973,190 km2 (1,147,960 sq mi)." (Library of Congress 2004). 
    ^  The Essential Desk Reference, Oxford University Press, 2002, p. 76, ISBN 978-0-19-512873-4  "Official name: Republic of India."; John Da Graça (2017), Heads of State and Government, London: Macmillian, pp. 421–, ISBN 978-1-349-65771-1  "Official name: Republic of India; Bharat Ganarajya (Hindi)"; Graham Rhind (2017), Global Sourcebook of Address Data Management: A Guide to Address Formats and Data in 194 Countries, Taylor & Francis, pp. 302–, ISBN 978-1-351-93326-1  "Official name: Republic of India; Bharat."; Bradnock, Robert W. (2015), The Routledge Atlas of South Asian Affairs, Routledge, pp. 108–, ISBN 978-1-317-40511-5  "Official name: English: Republic of India; Hindi:Bharat Ganarajya"; Penguin Compact Atlas of the World, Penguin, 2012, pp. 140–, ISBN 978-0-7566-9859-1  "Official name: Republic of India"; Hopkins, Daniel J.; STAFF, MERRIAM-WEBSTER (1997), Merriam-Webster's Geographical Dictionary, Merriam-Webster, pp. 515–, ISBN 978-0-87779-546-9  "Officially, Republic of India"; Complete Atlas of the World, 3rd Edition: The Definitive View of the Earth, DK Publishing, 2016, pp. 54–, ISBN 978-1-4654-5528-4  "Official name: Republic of India"; Worldwide Government Directory with Intergovernmental Organizations 2013, CQ Press, 10 May 2013, pp. 726–, ISBN 978-1-4522-9937-2  "India (Republic of India; Bharat Ganarajya)" 
    ^  The Government of India also regards Afghanistan as a bordering country, as it considers all of Kashmir to be part of India. However, this is disputed, and the region bordering Afghanistan is administered by Pakistan. Source: "Ministry of Home Affairs (Department of Border Management)" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF)  on 17 March 2015. Retrieved 1 September  2008 .  
    ^  The northernmost point under Indian control is the disputed Siachen Glacier in Jammu and Kashmir; however, the Government of India regards the entire region of the former princely state of Jammu and Kashmir, including the Gilgit-Baltistan administered by Pakistan, to be its territory. It therefore assigns the latitude 37° 6' to its northernmost point. 
    ^  A biodiversity hotspot is a biogeographical region which has more than 1,500 vascular plant species, but less than 30% of its primary habitat.[145] 
    ^  Canopy density is the proportion of area of a forest that covered by its tree canopy 
    ^  In 2015, the World Bank raised its international poverty line to $1.90 per day.[268] 

References 

    ^ a b c d  National Informatics Centre 2005. 
    ^ a b c  "National Symbols | National Portal of India". India.gov.in. Archived from the original on 4 February 2017. Retrieved 1 March  2017 . The National Anthem of India Jana Gana Mana, composed originally in Bengali by Rabindranath Tagore, was adopted in its Hindi version by the Constituent Assembly as the National Anthem of India on 24 January 1950.  
    ^  "National anthem of India: a brief on 'Jana Gana Mana' ". News18. Archived from the original on 17 April 2019. Retrieved 7 June  2019 .  
    ^  Wolpert 2003, p. 1. 
    ^ a b  Ministry of Home Affairs 1960. 
    ^ a b  "Profile | National Portal of India". India.gov.in. Archived from the original on 30 August 2013. Retrieved 23 August  2013 .  
    ^  "Constitutional Provisions – Official Language Related Part-17 of the Constitution of India". National Informatics Centre (in Hindi). Archived from the original on 8 November 2016. Retrieved 1 December  2017 .  
    ^  "Report of the Commissioner for linguistic minorities: 50th report (July 2012 to June 2013)" (PDF) . Commissioner for Linguistic Minorities, Ministry of Minority Affairs, Government of India. Archived from the original (PDF)  on 8 July 2016. Retrieved 26 December  2014 .  
    ^ a b  Khan, Saeed (25 January 2010). "There's no national language in India: Gujarat High Court". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 18 March 2014. Retrieved 5 May  2014 .  
    ^ a b  "Learning with the Times: India doesn't have any 'national language' ". Archived from the original on 10 October 2017.  
    ^ a b  Press Trust of India (25 January 2010). "Hindi, not a national language: Court". The Hindu. Ahmedabad. Archived from the original on 4 July 2014. Retrieved 23 December  2014 .  
    ^ a b  "C −1 Population by religious community – 2011". Office of the Registrar General & Census Commissioner. Archived from the original on 25 August 2015. Retrieved 25 August  2015 .  
    ^  "World Population Prospects: The 2017 Revision". ESA.UN.org (custom data acquired via website). United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. Retrieved 10 September  2017 .  
    ^  "Population Enumeration Data (Final Population)". Census of India. Archived from the original on 22 May 2016. Retrieved 17 June  2016 .  
    ^  "A – 2 Decadal Variation in Population Since 1901" (PDF) . Census of India. Archived (PDF)  from the original on 30 April 2016. Retrieved 17 June  2016 .  
    ^ a b c d e f g h  "World Economic Outlook Database, April 2019". IMF.org. International Monetary Fund. Retrieved 9 April  2019 .  
    ^  "Income Gini coefficient". United Nations Development Program. Archived from the original on 10 June 2010. Retrieved 14 January  2017 .  
    ^  "Human Development Indices and Indicators: 2018 Statistical update" (PDF) . United Nations Development Programme. 15 September 2018. Retrieved 15 September  2018 .  
    ^ a b  India, International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN), 2019  Quote: "India, a megadiverse country with only 2.4% of the world's land area, accounts for 7–8% of all recorded species, including over 45,000 species of plants and 91,000 species of animals. The country’s diverse physical features and climatic conditions have resulted in a variety of ecosystems such as forests, wetlands, grasslands, desert, coastal and marine ecosystems which harbour and sustain high biodiversity... Four of 34 globally identified biodiversity hotspots: The Himalayas, the Western Ghats, the North-East, and the Nicobar Islands, can be found in India." 
    ^  India (noun), Oxford English Dictionary, 3rd Edition, 2009  (subscription required) 
    ^  Thieme, P. (1970), "Sanskrit sindu-/Sindhu- and Old Iranian hindu-/Hindu-", in Mary Boyce; Ilya Gershevitch (eds.), W. B. Henning memorial volume, Lund Humphries, pp. 447–450  
    ^ a b  Kuiper 2010, p. 86. 
    ^ a b c  Clémentin-Ojha, Catherine (2014). "' India, that is Bharat…': One Country, Two Names". South Asia Multidisciplinary Academic Journal. 10. Archived from the original on 28 September 2015.  
    ^  Ministry of Law and Justice 2008. 
    ^  Jha, Dwijendra Narayan (2014), Rethinking Hindu Identity, Routledge, p. 11, ISBN 978-1-317-49034-0  
    ^  Singh, Upinder (2017), Political Violence in Ancient India, Harvard University Press, p. 253, ISBN 978-0-674-98128-7  
    ^ a b  Barrow, Ian J. (2003). "From Hindustan to India: Naming change in changing names". South Asia: Journal of South Asian Studies. 26 (1): 37–49. doi:10.1080/085640032000063977.  
    ^  Encyclopædia Britannica. 
    ^  Dyson, Tim (2018), A Population History of India: From the First Modern People to the Present Day, Oxford University Press, p. 1, ISBN 978-0-19-882905-8  Quote: "Modern human beings—Homo sapiens—originated in Africa. Then, intermittently, sometime between 60,000 and 80,000 years ago, tiny groups of them began to enter the north-west of the Indian subcontinent. It seems likely that initially they came by way of the coast. ... it is virtually certain that there were Homo sapiens in the subcontinent 55,000 years ago, even though the earliest fossils that have been found of them date to only about 30,000 years before the present. (page 1)" 
    ^  Michael D. Petraglia; Bridget Allchin (22 May 2007). The Evolution and History of Human Populations in South Asia: Inter-disciplinary Studies in Archaeology, Biological Anthropology, Linguistics and Genetics. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-4020-5562-1.  Quote: "Y-Chromosome and Mt-DNA data support the colonization of South Asia by modern humans originating in Africa. ... Coalescence dates for most non-European populations average to between 73–55 ka." 
    ^  Fisher, Michael H. (2018), An Environmental History of India: From Earliest Times to the Twenty-First Century, Cambridge University Press, p. 23, ISBN 978-1-107-11162-2  Quote: "Scholars estimate that the first successful expansion of the Homo sapiens range beyond Africa and across the Arabian Peninsula occurred from as early as 80,000 years ago to as late as 40,000 years ago, although there may have been prior unsuccessful emigrations. Some of their descendants extended the human range ever further in each generation, spreading into each habitable land they encountered. One human channel was along the warm and productive coastal lands of the Persian Gulf​ and northern Indian Ocean.​ Eventually, various bands entered India between 75,000 years ago and 35,000 years ago (page 23)" 
    ^  Petraglia, Allchin & 2007, p. 6. 
    ^  Singh 2009, pp. 89–93. 
    ^ a b  Coningham & Young 2015, pp. 104–105. 
    ^  Kulke & Rothermund 2004, pp. 21–23. 
    ^ a b  Singh 2009, p. 181. 
    ^  Possehl 2003, p. 2. 
    ^ a b c  Singh 2009, p. 255. 
    ^ a b  Singh 2009, pp. 186–187. 
    ^  Witzel 2003, pp. 68–69. 
    ^  Kulke & Rothermund 2004, pp. 41–43. 
    ^ a b  Singh 2009, pp. 250–251. 
    ^  Singh 2009, pp. 260–265. 
    ^  Kulke & Rothermund 2004, pp. 53–54. 
    ^  Singh 2009, pp. 312–313. 
    ^  Kulke & Rothermund 2004, pp. 54–56. 
    ^  Stein 1998, p. 21. 
    ^  Stein 1998, pp. 67–68. 
    ^  Singh 2009, p. 300. 
    ^ a b  Singh 2009, p. 319. 
    ^  Stein 1998, pp. 78–79. 
    ^  Kulke & Rothermund 2004, p. 70. 
    ^  Singh 2009, p. 367. 
    ^  Kulke & Rothermund 2004, p. 63. 
    ^  Stein 1998, pp. 89–90. 
    ^  Singh 2009, pp. 408–415. 
    ^  Stein 1998, pp. 92–95. 
    ^  Kulke & Rothermund 2004, pp. 89–91. 
    ^ a b c  Singh 2009, p. 545. 
    ^  Stein 1998, pp. 98–99. 
    ^ a b  Stein 1998, p. 132. 
    ^ a b c  Stein 1998, pp. 119–120. 
    ^ a b  Stein 1998, pp. 121–122. 
    ^ a b  Stein 1998, p. 123. 
    ^ a b  Stein 1998, p. 124. 
    ^ a b  Stein 1998, pp. 127–128. 
    ^  Ludden 2002, p. 68. 
    ^  Asher & Talbot 2008, p. 47. 
    ^  Metcalf & Metcalf 2006, p. 6. 
    ^  Ludden 2002, p. 67. 
    ^  Asher & Talbot 2008, pp. 50–51. 
    ^ a b  Asher & Talbot 2008, p. 53. 
    ^  Metcalf & Metcalf 2006, p. 12. 
    ^  Robb 2001, p. 80. 
    ^  Stein 1998, p. 164. 
    ^  Asher & Talbot 2008, p. 115. 
    ^  Robb 2001, pp. 90–91. 
    ^ a b  Metcalf & Metcalf 2006, p. 17. 
    ^ a b c  Asher & Talbot 2008, p. 152. 
    ^  Asher & Talbot 2008, p. 158. 
    ^  Stein 1998, p. 169. 
    ^  Asher & Talbot 2008, p. 186. 
    ^ a b  Metcalf & Metcalf 2006, pp. 23–24. 
    ^  Asher & Talbot 2008, p. 256. 
    ^ a b c  Asher & Talbot 2008, p. 286. 
    ^  Metcalf & Metcalf 2006, pp. 44–49. 
    ^  Robb 2001, pp. 98–100. 
    ^  Ludden 2002, pp. 128–132. 
    ^  Metcalf & Metcalf 2006, pp. 51–55. 
    ^  Metcalf & Metcalf 2006, pp. 68–71. 
    ^  Asher & Talbot 2008, p. 289. 
    ^  Robb 2001, pp. 151–152. 
    ^  Metcalf & Metcalf 2006, pp. 94–99. 
    ^  Brown 1994, p. 83. 
    ^  Peers 2006, p. 50. 
    ^  Metcalf & Metcalf 2006, pp. 100–103. 
    ^  Brown 1994, pp. 85–86. 
    ^  Stein 1998, p. 239. 
    ^  Metcalf & Metcalf 2006, pp. 103–108. 
    ^  Robb 2001, p. 183. 
    ^  Sarkar 1983, pp. 1–4. 
    ^  Copland 2001, pp. ix–x. 
    ^  Metcalf & Metcalf 2006, p. 123. 
    ^  Stein 1998, p. 260. 
    ^  Bose & Jalal 2011, p. 117. 
    ^  Stein 1998, p. 258. 
    ^ a b  Metcalf & Metcalf 2006, p. 126. 
    ^ a b  Metcalf & Metcalf 2006, p. 97. 
    ^  Metcalf & Metcalf 2006, p. 163. 
    ^  Metcalf & Metcalf 2006, p. 167. 
    ^  Metcalf & Metcalf 2006, pp. 195–197. 
    ^  Metcalf & Metcalf 2006, p. 203. 
    ^  Metcalf & Metcalf 2006, p. 231. 
    ^ a b c  Metcalf & Metcalf 2006, pp. 265–266. 
    ^  United States Department of Agriculture. 
    ^  Metcalf & Metcalf 2006, pp. 266–270. 
    ^  Metcalf & Metcalf 2006, p. 253. 
    ^  Metcalf & Metcalf 2006, p. 274. 
    ^ a b  Metcalf & Metcalf 2006, pp. 247–248. 
    ^  Metcalf & Metcalf 2006, pp. 293–295. 
    ^  Metcalf & Metcalf 2006, p. 304. 
    ^ a b c d  Ali & Aitchison 2005. 
    ^  Dikshit & Schwartzberg, p. 7. 
    ^  Prakash et al. 2000. 
    ^  Dikshit & Schwartzberg, p. 11. 
    ^  Dikshit & Schwartzberg, p. 8. 
    ^  Dikshit & Schwartzberg, pp. 9–10. 
    ^  Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 2007, p. 1. 
    ^ a b  Kumar et al. 2006. 
    ^  Dikshit & Schwartzberg, p. 15. 
    ^  Duff 1993, p. 353. 
    ^  Dikshit & Schwartzberg, p. 16. 
    ^  Dikshit & Schwartzberg, p. 17. 
    ^  Dikshit & Schwartzberg, p. 12. 
    ^  Dikshit & Schwartzberg, p. 13. 
    ^ a b  Chang 1967, pp. 391–394. 
    ^  Posey 1994, p. 118. 
    ^  Wolpert 2003, p. 4. 
    ^  Heitzman & Worden 1996, p. 97. 
    ^  Griffiths 2010, p. 66. 
    ^  Megadiverse Countries, Biodiversity A–Z and UN Environment World Conservation Monitoring Centre  
    ^  Zoological Survey of India 2012, p. 1. 
    ^ a b  Puri. 
    ^  Basak 1983, p. 24. 
    ^ a b  Venkataraman, K.; Sivaperuman, C. (2018), "Biodiversity Hotspots in India", in Sivaperuman, C. and Venkataraman, K. (ed.), Indian Hotspots: Vertebrate Faunal Diversity, Conservation and Management, Springer, p. 5, ISBN 978-981-10-6605-4 CS1 maint: Multiple names: editors list (link)  
    ^ a b c d  Jha, Raghbendra (2018), Facets of India's Economy and Her Society Volume II: Current State and Future Prospects, Springer, pp. 198–, ISBN 978-1-349-95342-4  
    ^ a b c d  Tritsch 2001. 
    ^  Goyal, Anupam (2006), The WTO and International Environmental Law: Towards Conciliation, Oxford University Press, p. 295, ISBN 978-0-19-567710-2  Quote: "The Indian government successfully argued that the medicinal neem tree is part of traditional Indian knowledge. (page 295)" 
    ^  Hughes, Julie E. (2013), Animal Kingdoms, Harvard University Press, pp. 106–, ISBN 978-0-674-07480-4  Quote: "At same time, the leafy pipal trees and comparative abundance that marked the Mewari landscape fostered refinements unattainable in other lands." 
    ^  Ameri, Marta; Costello, Sarah Kielt; Jamison, Gregg; Scott, Sarah Jarmer (2018), Seals and Sealing in the Ancient World: Case Studies from the Near East, Egypt, the Aegean, and South Asia, Cambridge University Press, pp. 156–7, ISBN 978-1-108-17351-3  Quote: ""The last of the centaurs has the long, wavy, horizontal horns of a markhor, a human face, a heavy-set body that appears bovine, and a goat tail ... This figure is often depicted by itself, but it is also consistently represented in scenes that seem to reflect the adoration of a figure in a pipal tree or arbor and which may be termed ritual. These include fully detailed scenes like that visible in the large "divine adoration" seal from Mohenjo-daro." 
    ^  Paul Gwynne (2011), World Religions in Practice: A Comparative Introduction, John Wiley & Sons, p. 358, ISBN 978-1-4443-6005-9  Quote: "The tree under which Sakyamuni became the Buddha is a peepal tree (Ficus religiosa). page 358" 
    ^  Crame & Owen 2002, p. 142. 
    ^  Karanth 2006. 
    ^  Singh, M.; Kumar, A. & Molur, S. (2008). "Trachypithecus johnii". The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. 2008: e.T44694A10927987. doi:10.2305/IUCN.UK.2008.RLTS.T44694A10927987.en.  
    ^  "Semnopithecus johnii". ITIS. Retrieved 27 August  2018 .  
    ^ a b  S.D. Biju; Sushil Dutta; M.S. Ravichandran Karthikeyan Vasudevan; S.P. Vijayakumar; Chelmala Srinivasulu; Gajanan Dasaramji Bhuddhe (2004). "Duttaphrynus beddomii". The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. IUCN. 2004: e.T54584A86543952. doi:10.2305/IUCN.UK.2004.RLTS.T54584A11155448.en.  
    ^  Frost, Darrel R. (2015). "Duttaphrynus beddomii (Günther, 1876)". Amphibian Species of the World: an Online Reference. Version 6.0. American Museum of Natural History. Retrieved 13 September  2015 .  
    ^  Mace 1994, p. 4. 
    ^  Lovette, Irby J.; Fitzpatrick, John W. (2016), Handbook of Bird Biology, John Wiley & Sons, pp. 599–, ISBN 978-1-118-29105-4  
    ^  Ministry of Environments and Forests 1972. 
    ^  Department of Environment and Forests 1988. 
    ^  Ministry of Environment and Forests. 
    ^  Secretariat of the Convention on Wetlands. 
    ^  United Nations Population Division. 
    ^  Burnell & Calvert 1999, p. 125. 
    ^  Election Commission of India. 
    ^  Saez, Lawrence; Sinha, Aseema (2010). "Political cycles, political institutions and public expenditure in India, 1980–2000". British Journal of Political Science. 40 (1): 91–113. doi:10.1017/s0007123409990226.  
    ^  Malik & Singh 1992, pp. 318–336. 
    ^  BBC 2012. 
    ^  Banerjee 2005, p. 3118. 
    ^  Sarkar 2007, p. 84. 
    ^  Chander 2004, p. 117. 
    ^  Bhambhri 1992, pp. 118, 143. 
    ^  The Hindu 2008. 
    ^  Dunleavy, Diwakar & Dunleavy 2007. 
    ^  Kulke & Rothermund 2004, p. 384. 
    ^  Business Standard 2009. 
    ^  "BJP first party since 1984 to win parliamentary majority on its own". DNA. IANS. 16 May 2014. Archived from the original on 21 May 2014. Retrieved 20 May  2014 .  
    ^  "Election commission" (PDF) . eci.nic.in. 21 July 2017. Archived (PDF)  from the original on 11 August 2017.  
    ^  "Oath". India Today. Archived from the original on 21 July 2017.  
    ^  "Highlights: Ram Nath Kovind takes oath as India's 14th President". The Indian Express. 25 July 2017. Archived from the original on 11 August 2017. Retrieved 10 August  2017 .  
    ^  Pylee, 2003 & a, p. 4. 
    ^  Dutt 1998, p. 421. 
    ^  Wheare 1980, p. 28. 
    ^  Echeverri-Gent 2002, pp. 19–20. 
    ^  Sinha 2004, p. 25. 
    ^  "In RTI reply, Centre says India has no national game". 2 August 2012. Archived from the original on 4 August 2012. Retrieved 4 August  2012 .  
    ^  "The Constitution of India" (PDF) . Retrieved 16 July  2016 .  
    ^ a b  Sharma 2007, p. 31. 
    ^  Sharma 2007, p. 138. 
    ^  Gledhill 1970, p. 112. 
    ^ a b  Sharma 1950. 
    ^ a b  Sharma 2007, p. 162. 
    ^  Mathew 2003, p. 524. 
    ^  Gledhill 1970, p. 127. 
    ^  Sharma 2007, p. 161. 
    ^  Sharma 2007, p. 143. 
    ^  Sharma 2007, p. 360. 
    ^ a b  Neuborne 2003, p. 478. 
    ^  Sharma 2007, pp. 238, 255. 
    ^  Sripati 1998, pp. 423–424. 
    ^  Pylee, 2003 & b, p. 314. 
    ^ a b c d e  Library of Congress 2004. 
    ^  Sharma 2007, p. 49. 
    ^  Rothermund 2000, pp. 48, 227. 
    ^  Gilbert 2002, pp. 486–487. 
    ^  Sharma 1999, p. 56. 
    ^  "No ties with Pakistan at India's cost, relations with New Delhi long-term: Russia | India News". Retrieved 14 October  2018 .  
    ^  Alford 2008. 
    ^  "India and Latin America Trade – Economic Ties Latin America and India". www.americasquarterly.org. Archived from the original on 25 May 2017. Retrieved 19 May  2017 .  
    ^  Ghosh 2009, pp. 282–289. 
    ^  Sisodia & Naidu 2005, pp. 1–8. 
    ^  Perkovich 2001, pp. 60–86, 106–125. 
    ^  Kumar 2010. 
    ^  Nair 2007. 
    ^  Pandit 2009. 
    ^ a b  The Hindu 2011. 
    ^  Europa 2008. 
    ^  The Times of India 2008. 
    ^  British Broadcasting Corporation 2009. 
    ^  Rediff 2008 a. 
    ^  Reuters 2010. 
    ^  Curry 2010. 
    ^ a b c  Central Intelligence Agency. 
    ^  Behera 2011. 
    ^  Behera 2012. 
    ^  Stockholm International Peace Research Institute 2008, p. 178. 
    ^ a b  Miglani 2011. 
    ^  Shukla 2011. 
    ^  Stockholm International Peace Research Initiative 2012. 
    ^  "Isro-Saarc satellite to be a communication vehicle". Deccan Herald. Deccan Herald News Service. 12 January 2015. Retrieved 22 April  2015 .  
    ^  "India Russia S-400 missile deal: All you need to know". The Times of India. 5 October 2018. Retrieved 9 October  2018 .  
    ^  International Monetary Fund 2011, p. 2. 
    ^  Nayak, Goldar & Agrawal 2010, p. xxv. 
    ^  International Monetary Fund. 
    ^  Wolpert 2003, p. xiv. 
    ^ a b c  Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 2007. 
    ^  Gargan 1992. 
    ^  Alamgir 2008, pp. 23, 97. 
    ^  WTO 1995. 
    ^  Sakib Sherani (17 April 2015). "Pakistan's remittances". dawn.com. Archived from the original on 16 December 2015. Retrieved 17 December  2015 .  
    ^  The Times of India 2009. 
    ^  World Trade Organization 2010. 
    ^  Economist 2011. 
    ^  UN Comtrade (4 February 2015). "India world's second largest textiles exporter". TechCrunch. economictimes. Retrieved 2 June  2014 .  
    ^  Bonner 2010. 
    ^ a b  Farrell & Beinhocker 2007. 
    ^  Schwab 2010. 
    ^  Sheth 2009. 
    ^  "How Many People in India Pay Income Tax? Hardly Anyone". 6 June 2013. Archived from the original on 31 December 2013.  
    ^  International Monetary Fund 2011. 
    ^ a b c  PricewaterhouseCoopers 2011. 
    ^  World Bank 2010. 
    ^  "Measuring the cost of living worldwide". The Economist. 21 March 2017. Archived from the original on 25 May 2017. Retrieved 25 May  2017 .  
    ^  Telecom Regulatory Authority 2011. 
    ^  Khan, Danish (28 October 2017). "Indian smartphone market grows 23% to overtake US in Q3; Samsung, Xiaomi drive shipments". The Economic Times. Archived from the original on 31 October 2017. Retrieved 5 November  2017 .  
    ^  Business Line 2010. 
    ^  Express India 2009. 
    ^  "India's total power capacity crosses 300 gw mark". NDTV. Archived from the original on 16 June 2017.  
    ^  Nasscom 2011–2012. 
    ^  Vishal Dutta (10 July 2012). "Indian biotech industry at critical juncture, global biotech stabilises: Report". Economic Times. Retrieved 31 October  2012 .  
    ^  "Indian pharmaceutical industry – growth story to continue". Express Pharma. 15 January 2012. Archived from the original on 16 January 2013. Retrieved 31 October  2012 .  
    ^  Biotechnology and Pharmaceutical Sector in India: sector briefing by the UK Trade and Investment 2011, utki.gov.uk 
    ^  Yep 2011. 
    ^  "Differding Consulting Publi 6". Differding.com. 11 February 2014. Archived from the original on 23 February 2014. Retrieved 4 April  2014 .  
    ^  World Bank 2006. 
    ^  World Bank a. 
    ^  Kenny, Charles; Sandefur, Justin (7 October 2015). "Why the World Bank is changing the definition of the word "poor" ". Vox. Archived from the original on 14 January 2017. Retrieved 26 February  2017 .  
    ^  "Poverty headcount ratio at $1.90 a day (2011 PPP) (% of population)". World Bank. Archived from the original on 15 February 2017. Retrieved 26 February  2017 .  
    ^  "India's rank improves to 55th position on global hunger index". India times. 13 October 2014.  
    ^  Internet Desk (28 May 2015). "India is home to 194 million hungry people: UN". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 2 December 2016.  
    ^  "India home to world's largest number of hungry people: report". dawn.com. 29 May 2015. Archived from the original on 29 May 2015.  
    ^  Drèze & Goyal 2008, p. 46. 
    ^  "India – Global Slavery Index 2016". Walk Free Foundation. Archived from the original on 3 May 2017. Retrieved 21 November  2017 .  
    ^  "Bonded labourers, sex workers, forced beggars: India leads world in slavery". 31 May 2016. Archived from the original on 1 October 2017. Retrieved 21 November  2017 .  
    ^  "India ranks fourth in global slavery survey". Times of India. 1 June 2016. Archived from the original on 1 October 2017. Retrieved 21 November  2017 .  
    ^  "Child labour in India – ILO" (PDF) . International Labour Organization. Archived (PDF)  from the original on 1 December 2017. Retrieved 21 November  2017 .  
    ^  Pal & Ghosh 2007. 
    ^  "India improves its ranking on corruption index". 27 January 2016. Retrieved 21 November  2017 .  
    ^  "Corruption Perceptions Index 2018" (PDF) . transparency.org. Transparency International. Retrieved 15 July  2019 .  
    ^ a b  Provisional Population Totals, Census 2011, p. 160. 
    ^ a b  Provisional Population Totals, Census 2011, p. 165. 
    ^  "Census Population" (PDF) . Census of India. Ministry of Finance India. Archived from the original (PDF)  on 12 August 2011. Retrieved 13 February  2013 .  
    ^  Rorabacher 2010, pp. 35–39. 
    ^  World Health Organization 2006. 
    ^  Boston Analytics 2009. 
    ^  "Life expectancy in India" (PDF) . newspaper. Times of India. Archived from the original on 21 September 2014.  
    ^  Dev & Rao 2009, p. 329. 
    ^  Garg 2005. 
    ^  Dyson & Visaria 2005, pp. 115–129. 
    ^  Ratna 2007, pp. 271–272. 
    ^ a b  Chandramouli 2011. 
    ^  "Urban Agglomerations/Cities having population 1 lakh and above" (PDF) . Office of the Registrar General & Census Commissioner, India. Archived (PDF)  from the original on 17 October 2013. Retrieved 12 May  2014 .  
    ^ a b  Provisional Population Totals, Census 2011, p. 163. 
    ^  "Urdu is Telangana's second official language". The Indian Express. 16 November 2017. Archived from the original on 27 February 2018. Retrieved 27 February  2018 .  
    ^  Dharwadker 2010, pp. 168–194, 186. 
    ^  Ottenheimer 2008, p. 303. 
    ^  Mallikarjun 2004. 
    ^  Global Muslim population estimated at 1.57 billion Archived 1 June 2013 at the Wayback Machine. The Hindu (8 October 2009) 
    ^  "India Chapter Summary 2012" (PDF) . Archived (PDF)  from the original on 7 April 2014.  
    ^  Kuiper 2010, p. 15. 
    ^ a b  Heehs 2002, pp. 2–5. 
    ^  Deutsch 1969, pp. 3, 78. 
    ^  Nakamura 1999. 
    ^  Kuiper 2010, pp. 296–329. 
    ^  Silverman 2007, p. 20. 
    ^  Kumar 2000, p. 5. 
    ^  Roberts 2004, p. 73. 
    ^  Lang & Moleski 2010, pp. 151–152. 
    ^  United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organisation. 
    ^  Chopra 2011, p. 46. 
    ^  Hoiberg & Ramchandani 2000. 
    ^  Johnson 2008. 
    ^  MacDonell 2004, pp. 1–40. 
    ^  Kālidāsa & Johnson 2001. 
    ^  Zvelebil 1997, p. 12. 
    ^  Hart 1975. 
    ^  Encyclopædia Britannica 2008. 
    ^  Ramanujan 1985, pp. ix–x. 
    ^  Das 2005. 
    ^  Datta 2006. 
    ^  Massey & Massey 1998. 
    ^  Encyclopædia Britannica b. 
    ^  Lal 2004, pp. 23, 30, 235. 
    ^  Karanth 2002, p. 26. 
    ^  "The Sunday Tribune – Spectrum". www.tribuneindia.com. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 4 October  2017 .  
    ^  Dissanayake & Gokulsing 2004. 
    ^  Rajadhyaksha & Willemen 1999, p. 652. 
    ^  The Economic Times. 
    ^  Sunetra Sen Narayan, Globalization and Television: A Study of the Indian Experience, 1990–2010 (Oxford University Press, 2015); 307 pages 
    ^  Kaminsky & Long 2011, pp. 684–692. 
    ^  Mehta 2008, pp. 1–10. 
    ^  Media Research Users Council 2012. 
    ^  Schwartzberg 2011. 
    ^  "Spiritual Terrorism: Spiritual Abuse from the Womb to the Tomb", p. 391, by Boyd C. Purcell 
    ^  Messner 2009, p. 51-53. 
    ^  Messner 2012, p. 27-28. 
    ^  Makar 2007. 
    ^ a b  Medora 2003. 
    ^ a b  Jones & Ramdas 2005, p. 111. 
    ^  Cullen-Dupont 2009, p. 96. 
    ^  Bunting 2011. 
    ^  Agnivesh 2005. 
    ^  Census of India-Gender Composition Archived 13 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine 2011 
    ^  "Woman killed over dowry 'every hour' in India". telegraph.com. 2 September 2013. Archived from the original on 23 March 2014. Retrieved 10 February  2014 .  
    ^  "Rising number of dowry deaths in India:NCRB". thehindu.com. 7 August 2013. Archived from the original on 7 February 2014. Retrieved 10 February  2014 .  
    ^  Indian Festivals, archived from the original on 14 July 2016, retrieved 14 May  2016   
    ^  Popular India Festivals, archived from the original on 28 July 2011, retrieved 23 December  2007   
    ^  Tarlo 1996, pp. xii, xii, 11, 15, 28, 46. 
    ^  Eraly 2008, p. 160. 
    ^  Johnston, Bruce F. (1958). The Staple Food Economies of Western Tropical Africa. Stanford University Press. p. 14. ISBN 978-0-8047-0537-0. Archived from the original on 28 May 2013. Retrieved 2 June  2012 .  
    ^  Cornillez, Louise Marie M. (Spring 1999). "The History of the Spice Trade in India". Retrieved 18 February  2018 .  
    ^  Wolpert 2003, p. 2. 
    ^  Rediff 2008 b. 
    ^  Binmore 2007, p. 98. 
    ^  The Wall Street Journal 2009. 
    ^  British Broadcasting Corporation 2010 b. 
    ^  The Times of India 2010. 
    ^  British Broadcasting Corporation 2010 a. 
    ^  Mint 2010. 
    ^  Xavier 2010. 
    ^  Majumdar & Bandyopadhyay 2006, pp. 1–5. 
    ^  Shores, Lori (15 February 2007), Teens in India, Compass Point Books, p. 78, ISBN 978-0-7565-2063-2, retrieved 24 July  2011   
    ^  "Top 10 most watched sports leagues in the world". www.sportskeeda.com. 11 January 2016. Retrieved 14 May  2019 .  
    ^  Dehejia 2011. 
    ^  "Basketball team named for 11th South Asian Games". Nation.com.pk. 2 January 2010. Archived from the original on 2 December 2012. Retrieved 8 March  2013 .  

Bibliography 
Overview

    "India", The World Factbook, Central Intelligence Agency, retrieved 23 August  2017  
    "Country Profile: India" (PDF) , Library of Congress Country Studies (5th ed.), Library of Congress Federal Research Division, December 2004, retrieved 30 September  2011  
    Heitzman, J.; Worden, R. L. (August 1996), India: A Country Study, Area Handbook Series, Washington, D.C.: Library of Congress, ISBN 978-0-8444-0833-0 
    India, International Monetary Fund, retrieved 14 October  2011  
    Provisional Population Totals, Paper 1 – Census 2011, Office of the Registrar General and Census Commissioner, 2011, lay summary 
    "Constituent Assembly of India – Volume XII", Constituent Assembly of India: Debates, National Informatics Centre, Government of India, 24 January 1950, archived from the original on 21 July 2011, retrieved 17 July  2011  
    There's No National Language in India: Gujarat High Court, The Times of India, 6 January 2007, retrieved 17 July  2011  
    "Table 1: Human Development Index and its Components" (PDF) , Human Development Report 2011, United Nations, 2011 

Etymology

    Serge Gruzinski (13 January 2015), The Eagle and the Dragon: Globalization and European Dreams of Conquest in China and America in the Sixteenth Century, John Wiley & Sons, ISBN 978-0-7456-8134-4 
    Hindustan, Encyclopædia Britannica, retrieved 17 July  2011  
    Kaye, A. S. (1 September 1997), Phonologies of Asia and Africa, Eisenbrauns, ISBN 978-1-57506-019-4 
    Kuiper, K., ed. (July 2010), Culture of India, Rosen Publishing Group, ISBN 978-1-61530-203-1 
    Constitution of India (PDF) , Ministry of Law and Justice, 29 July 2008, archived from the original (PDF)  on 9 September 2014, retrieved 3 March  2012 , Article 1(1): "India, that is Bharat, shall be a Union of States." 
    "India", Oxford English Dictionary, Oxford University Press, retrieved 17 July  2011  

History

    Asher, C. B.; Talbot, C (1 January 2008), India Before Europe (1st ed.), Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-51750-8 
    Bose, S.; Jalal, A. (11 March 2011), Modern South Asia: History, Culture, Political Economy (3rd ed.), Routledge, ISBN 978-0-415-77942-5 
    Brown, J. M. (26 May 1994), Modern India: The Origins of an Asian Democracy, The Short Oxford History of the Modern World (2nd ed.), Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-873113-9 
    Coningham, Robin; Young, Ruth (2015), The Archaeology of South Asia: From the Indus to Asoka, c.6500 BCE–200 CE, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-84697-4 
    Copland, I. (8 October 2001), India 1885–1947: The Unmaking of an Empire (1st ed.), Longman, ISBN 978-0-582-38173-5 
    Kulke, H.; Rothermund, D. (1 August 2004), A History of India, 4th, Routledge, ISBN 978-0-415-32920-0 
    Ludden, D. (13 June 2002), India and South Asia: A Short History, One World, ISBN 978-1-85168-237-9 
    Metcalf, B.; Metcalf, T. R. (9 October 2006), A Concise History of Modern India (2nd ed.), Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-68225-1 
    Peers, D. M. (3 August 2006), India under Colonial Rule 1700–1885 (1st ed.), Pearson Longman, ISBN 978-0-582-31738-3 
    Petraglia, Michael D.; Allchin, Bridget (2007), "Human evolution and culture change in the Indian subcontinent", in Michael Petraglia; Bridget Allchin (eds.), The Evolution and History of Human Populations in South Asia: Inter-disciplinary Studies in Archaeology, Biological Anthropology, Linguistics and Genetics, Springer, ISBN 978-1-4020-5562-1 
    Possehl, G. (January 2003), The Indus Civilization: A Contemporary Perspective, Rowman Altamira, ISBN 978-0-7591-0172-2 
    Robb, P. (2001), A History of India, London: Palgrave, ISBN 978-0-333-69129-8 
    Sarkar, S. (1983), Modern India: 1885–1947, Delhi: Macmillan India, ISBN 978-0-333-90425-1 
    Singh, U. (2009), A History of Ancient and Medieval India: From the Stone Age to the 12th Century, Delhi: Longman, ISBN 978-81-317-1677-9 
    Sripati, V. (1998), "Toward Fifty Years of Constitutionalism and Fundamental Rights in India: Looking Back to See Ahead (1950–2000)", American University International Law Review, 14 (2): 413–496 
    Stein, B. (16 June 1998), A History of India (1st ed.), Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, ISBN 978-0-631-20546-3 
    Stein, B. (27 April 2010), Arnold, D. (ed.), A History of India (2nd ed.), Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, ISBN 978-1-4051-9509-6 
    "Briefing Rooms: India", Economic Research Service, United States Department of Agriculture, 17 December 2009, archived from the original on 20 May 2011 
    Thapar, Romila (2003), Penguin history of early India: from the origins to A.D.1300, Penguin Books, retrieved 13 February  2012  
    Witzel, Michael (2001), "Autochthonous Aryans? The Evidence from Old Indian and Iranian Texts" (PDF) , Electronic Journal of Vedic Studies, 7 (3): 1–115 
    Witzel, Michael (2003), "Vedas and Upanișads", in Gavin D. Flood (ed.), The Blackwell companion to Hinduism, John Wiley & Sons, ISBN 978-0-631-21535-6, retrieved 15 March  2012  
    Witzel, Michael (2005), "Indocentrism", in Bryant, Edwin; Patton, Laurie L. (eds.), TheE Indo-Aryan Controversy. Evidence and inference in Indian history, Routledge 
    Wolpert, S. (25 December 2003), A New History of India (7th ed.), Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-516678-1 

Geography

    Ali, J. R.; Aitchison, J. C. (2005), "Greater India", Earth-Science Reviews, 72 (3–4): 170–173, Bibcode:2005ESRv...72..169A, doi:10.1016/j.earscirev.2005.07.005 
    Chang, J. H. (1967), "The Indian Summer Monsoon", Geographical Review, [American Geographical Society, Wiley], 57 (3), pp. 373–396, doi:10.2307/212640, JSTOR 212640 
    Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 with Amendments Made in 1988 (PDF) , Department of Environment and Forests, Government of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, 1988, archived from the original (PDF)  on 21 July 2011, retrieved 25 July  2011  
    Dikshit, K. R.; Schwartzberg, Joseph E., "India: Land", Encyclopædia Britannica, pp. 1–29 
    Duff, D. (29 October 1993), Holmes Principles of Physical Geology (4th ed.), Routledge, ISBN 978-0-7487-4381-0 
    Kumar, V. S.; Pathak, K. C.; Pednekar, P.; Raju, N. S. N. (2006), "Coastal processes along the Indian coastline" (PDF) , Current Science, 91 (4), pp. 530–536, archived from the original (PDF)  on 8 September 2009 
    India Yearbook 2007, New Delhi: Publications Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India, 2007, ISBN 978-81-230-1423-4 
    Posey, C. A. (1 November 1994), The Living Earth Book of Wind and Weather, Reader's Digest, ISBN 978-0-89577-625-9 
    Prakash, B.; Kumar, S.; Rao, M. S.; Giri, S. C. (2000), "Holocene Tectonic Movements and Stress Field in the Western Gangetic Plains" (PDF) , Current Science, 79 (4): 438–449 

Biodiversity

    Ali, S.; Ripley, S. D.; Dick, J. H. (15 August 1996), A Pictorial Guide to the Birds of the Indian Subcontinent (2nd ed.), Mumbai: Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-563732-8 
    Animal Discoveries 2011: New Species and New Records (PDF) , Zoological Survey of India, 2012, archived from the original (PDF)  on 16 January 2013, retrieved 20 July  2012  
    Basak, R. K. (1983), Botanical Survey of India: Account of Its Establishment, Development, and Activities, retrieved 20 July  2011  
    "Hotspots by Region", Biodiversity Hotspots, Conservation International, 2007, archived from the original on 8 July 2007, retrieved 28 February  2011  
    Crame, J. A.; Owen, A. W. (1 August 2002), Palaeobiogeography and Biodiversity Change: The Ordovician and Mesozoic–Cenozoic Radiations, Geological Society Special Publication (194), Geological Society of London, ISBN 978-1-86239-106-2, retrieved 8 December  2011  
    "Forest Cover" (PDF) . State of Forest Report 2013. Dehradun: Forest Survey of India. 2013. 
    Griffiths, M. (6 July 2010), The Lotus Quest: In Search of the Sacred Flower, St. Martin's Press, ISBN 978-0-312-64148-1 
    Karanth, K. P. (25 March 2006), "Out-of-India Gondwanan Origin of Some Tropical Asian Biota" (PDF) , Current Science, 90 (6): 789–792, retrieved 18 May  2011  
    Mace, G. M. (March 1994), "1994 IUCN Red List of Threatened Animals", World Conservation Monitoring Centre, International Union for Conservation of Nature, ISBN 978-2-8317-0194-3 
    "Biosphere Reserves of India", C. P. R. Environment Education Centre, Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India, retrieved 17 July  2011  
    Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, Ministry of Environments and Forests, Government of India, 9 September 1972, retrieved 25 July  2011  
    Puri, S. K., Biodiversity Profile of India, archived from the original on 21 November 2011, retrieved 20 June  2007  
    The List of Wetlands of International Importance (PDF) , The Secretariat of the Convention on Wetlands, 4 June 2007, p. 18, archived from the original (PDF)  on 21 June 2007, retrieved 20 June  2007  
    Tritsch, M. F. (3 September 2001), Wildlife of India, London: HarperCollins, ISBN 978-0-00-711062-9 

Politics

    Banerjee, Sumanta (16–22 July 2005). "Civilising the BJP". Economic & Political Weekly. 40 (29): 3116–3119. JSTOR 4416896. 
    Bhambhri, C. P. (1 May 1992), Politics in India, 1991–1992, Shipra, ISBN 978-81-85402-17-8, retrieved 20 July  2011  
    Burnell, P. J.; Calvert, P. (1 May 1999), The Resilience of Democracy: Persistent Practice, Durable Idea (1st ed.), Taylor & Francis, ISBN 978-0-7146-8026-2, retrieved 20 July  2011  
    India, Press Trust of (16 May 2009), "Second UPA Win, A Crowning Glory for Sonia's Ascendancy", Business Standard India, Business Standard, retrieved 13 June  2009  
    Chander, N. J. (1 January 2004), Coalition Politics: The Indian Experience, Concept Publishing Company, ISBN 978-81-8069-092-1, retrieved 20 July  2011  
    Dunleavy, P.; Diwakar, R.; Dunleavy, C. (2007), The Effective Space of Party Competition (PDF)  (5), London School of Economics and Political Science, retrieved 27 September  2011  
    Dutt, S. (1998), "Identities and the Indian State: An Overview", Third World Quarterly, 19 (3): 411–434, doi:10.1080/01436599814325 
    Echeverri-Gent, J. (January 2002), "Politics in India's Decentred Polity", in Ayres, A.; Oldenburg, P. (eds.), Quickening the Pace of Change, India Briefing, London: M. E. Sharpe, pp. 19–53, ISBN 978-0-7656-0812-3 
    "Current Recognised Parties" (PDF) , Election Commission of India, 14 March 2009, retrieved 5 July  2010  
    Gledhill, A. (30 March 1970), The Republic of India: The Development of its Laws and Constitution, Greenwood, ISBN 978-0-8371-2813-9, retrieved 21 July  2011  
    Halarnkar, Samar (13 June 2012). "Narendra Modi makes his move". BBC News. The right-wing Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), India's primary opposition party 
    Narasimha Rao Passes Away, The Hindu, 24 December 2004, retrieved 2 November  2008  
    Malik, Yogendra K.; Singh, V.B. (April 1992). "Bharatiya Janata Party: An Alternative to the Congress (I)?". Asian Survey. 32 (4): 318–336. doi:10.2307/2645149. JSTOR 2645149. 
    Mathew, K. M. (1 January 2003), Manorama Yearbook, Malayala Manorama, ISBN 978-81-900461-8-3, retrieved 21 July  2011  
    "National Symbols of India", Know India, National Informatics Centre, Government of India, retrieved 27 September  2009  
    Neuborne, B. (2003), "The Supreme Court of India", International Journal of Constitutional Law, 1 (3): 476–510, doi:10.1093/icon/1.3.476 
    Pylee, M. V. (2003), "The Longest Constitutional Document", Constitutional Government in India (2nd ed.), S. Chand, ISBN 978-81-219-2203-6 
    Pylee, M. V. (2003), "The Union Judiciary: The Supreme Court", Constitutional Government in India (2nd ed.), S. Chand, ISBN 978-81-219-2203-6, retrieved 2 November  2007  
    Sarkar, N. I. (1 January 2007), Sonia Gandhi: Tryst with India, Atlantic, ISBN 978-81-269-0744-1, retrieved 20 July  2011  
    Sharma, R. (1950), "Cabinet Government in India", Parliamentary Affairs, 4 (1): 116–126, doi:10.1093/oxfordjournals.pa.a052755 
    Sharma, B. K. (August 2007), Introduction to the Constitution of India (4th ed.), Prentice Hall, ISBN 978-81-203-3246-1 
    Sinha, A. (2004), "The Changing Political Economy of Federalism in India", India Review, 3 (1): 25–63, doi:10.1080/14736480490443085 
    World's Largest Democracy to Reach One Billion Persons on Independence Day, United Nations Population Division, retrieved 5 October  2011  
    Wheare, K. C. (June 1980), Federal Government (4th ed.), Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-313-22702-8 

Foreign relations and military

    Alford, P. (7 July 2008), G8 Plus 5 Equals Power Shift, The Australian, retrieved 21 November  2009  
    Behera, L. K. (7 March 2011), Budgeting for India's Defence: An Analysis of Defence Budget 2011–2012, Institute for Defence Studies and Analyses, retrieved 4 April  2011  
    Behera, L. K. (20 March 2012), India's Defence Budget 2012–13, Institute for Defence Studies and Analyses, archived from the original on 15 December 2012, retrieved 26 March  2012  
    "Russia Agrees India Nuclear Deal", BBC News, British Broadcasting Corporation, 11 February 2009, retrieved 22 August  2010  
    Curry, B. (27 June 2010), Canada Signs Nuclear Deal with India, The Globe and Mail, retrieved 13 May  2011  
    "India, Europe Strategic Relations", Europa: Summaries of EU Legislation, European Union, 8 April 2008, retrieved 14 January  2011  
    Ghosh, A. (1 September 2009), India's Foreign Policy, Pearson, ISBN 978-81-317-1025-8 
    Gilbert, M. (17 December 2002), A History of the Twentieth Century, William Morrow, ISBN 978-0-06-050594-3, retrieved 22 July  2011  
    "India, Russia Review Defence Ties", The Hindu, 5 October 2009, retrieved 8 October  2011  
    Kumar, A. V. (1 May 2010), "Reforming the NPT to Include India", Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, retrieved 1 November  2010  
    Miglani, S. (28 February 2011), "With An Eye on China, India Steps Up Defence Spending", Reuters, retrieved 6 July  2011  
    Nair, V. K. (2007), No More Ambiguity: India's Nuclear Policy (PDF) , archived from the original (PDF)  on 27 September 2007, retrieved 7 June  2007  
    Pandit, R. (27 July 2009), N-Submarine to Give India Crucial Third Leg of Nuke Triad, The Times of India, retrieved 10 March  2010  
    Perkovich, G. (5 November 2001), India's Nuclear Bomb: The Impact on Global Proliferation, University of California Press, ISBN 978-0-520-23210-5, retrieved 22 July  2011  
    India, France Agree on Civil Nuclear Cooperation, Rediff, 25 January 2008, retrieved 22 August  2010  
    "UK, India Sign Civil Nuclear Accord", Reuters, 13 February 2010, retrieved 22 August  2010  
    Ripsman, N. M.; Paul, T. V. (18 March 2010), Globalization and the National Security State, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-539390-3, retrieved 22 July  2011  
    Rothermund, D. (17 October 2000), The Routledge Companion to Decolonization, Routledge Companions to History (1st ed.), Routledge, ISBN 978-0-415-35632-9 
    India Gets Its First Homegrown Fighter Jet, RIA Novosti, 10 January 2011, retrieved 1 April  2009  
    Sharma, S. R. (1 January 1999), India–USSR Relations 1947–1971: From Ambivalence to Steadfastness, 1, Discovery, ISBN 978-81-7141-486-4 
    Shukla, A. (5 March 2011), "China Matches India's Expansion in Military Spending", Business Standard India, Business Standard, retrieved 6 July  2011  
    Sisodia, N. S.; Naidu, G. V. C. (2005), Changing Security Dynamic in Eastern Asia: Focus on Japan, Promilla, ISBN 978-81-86019-52-8 
    "SIPRI Yearbook 2008: Armaments, Disarmament, and International Security", Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, Oxford University Press, 8 August 2008, ISBN 978-0-19-954895-8, retrieved 22 July  2011  
    "Rise in international arms transfers is driven by Asian demand, says SIPRI", Stockholm International Peace Research Initiative, 19 March 2012, retrieved 5 April  2016  
    India, US Sign 123 Agreement, The Times of India, 11 October 2008, retrieved 21 July  2011  

Economy

    Alamgir, J. (24 December 2008), India's Open-Economy Policy: Globalism, Rivalry, Continuity, Taylor & Francis, ISBN 978-0-415-77684-4, retrieved 23 July  2011  
    Bonner, B (20 March 2010), "Make Way, World. India Is on the Move", Christian Science Monitor, retrieved 23 July  2011  
    "India Lost $462bn in Illegal Capital Flows, Says Report", BBC News, British Broadcasting Corporation, 18 November 2010, retrieved 23 July  2011  
    "India Second Fastest Growing Auto Market After China", Business Line, 9 April 2010, retrieved 23 July  2011  
    Drèze, Jean; Sen, Amartya (2013), An Uncertain Glory: India and Its Contradictions, Allen Lane 
    "India's Economy: Not Just Rubies and Polyester Shirts", The Economist, 8 October 2011, retrieved 9 October  2011  
    "Indian Car Exports Surge 36%", Express India, 13 October 2009, retrieved 5 April  2016  
    Report for Selected Countries and Subjects: Afghanistan, Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Nepal, Pakistan, Philippines, Sri Lanka, Thailand, International Monetary Fund, April 2011, retrieved 23 July  2011  
    Farrell, D.; Beinhocker, E. (19 May 2007), Next Big Spenders: India's Middle Class, McKinsey & Company, retrieved 17 September  2011  
    Gargan, E. A. (15 August 1992), "India Stumbles in Rush to a Free Market Economy", The New York Times, retrieved 22 July  2011  
    World Economic Outlook Update (PDF) , International Monetary Fund, June 2011, retrieved 22 July  2011  
    Nayak, P. B.; Goldar, B.; Agrawal, P. (10 November 2010), India's Economy and Growth: Essays in Honour of V. K. R. V. Rao, SAGE Publications, ISBN 978-81-321-0452-0 
    Economic Survey of India 2007: Policy Brief (PDF) , Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, October 2007, archived from the original (PDF)  on 6 June 2011, retrieved 22 July  2011  
    Pal, P.; Ghosh, J (July 2007), "Inequality in India: A Survey of Recent Trends" (PDF) , Economic and Social Affairs: DESA Working Paper No. 45, United Nations, retrieved 23 July  2011  
    PricewaterhouseCoopers (January 2011), The World in 2050: The Accelerating Shift of Global Economic Power: Challenges and Opportunities (PDF) , retrieved 23 July  2011  
    Schwab, K. (2010), The Global Competitiveness Report 2010–2011 (PDF) , World Economic Forum, retrieved 10 May  2011  
    Sheth, N. (28 May 2009), "Outlook for Outsourcing Spending Brightens", The Wall Street Journal, retrieved 3 October  2010  
    Srivastava, V. C. (2008), "Introduction", in V.C. Srivastava; Lallanji Gopal; D.P. Chattopadhyaya (eds.), History of Agriculture in India (p to c 1200 AD), History of Science, Philosophy and Culture in Indian Civization, V (Part 1), Concept Publishing Co, ISBN 978-81-8069-521-6 
    Information Note to the Press (Press Release No.29 /2011) (PDF) , Telecom Regulatory Authority of India, 6 April 2011, archived from the original (PDF)  on 16 May 2011, retrieved 23 July  2011  
    Exporters Get Wider Market Reach, The Times of India, 28 August 2009, retrieved 23 July  2011  
    Corruption Perception Index 2010 – India Continues to be Corrupt (PDF) , Transparency International, 26 October 2011, archived from the original (PDF)  on 28 July 2011, retrieved 23 July  2011  
    New Global Poverty Estimates – What It Means for India, World Bank, retrieved 23 July  2011  
    "India: Undernourished Children – A Call for Reform and Action", World Bank, retrieved 23 July  2011  
    Inclusive Growth and Service Delivery: Building on India's Success (PDF) , World Bank, 29 May 2006, archived from the original (PDF)  on 21 August 2011, retrieved 7 May  2009  
    India Country Overview September 2010, World Bank, September 2010, retrieved 23 July  2011  
    Trade to Expand by 9.5% in 2010 After a Dismal 2009, WTO Reports, World Trade Organization, 26 March 2010, retrieved 23 July  2011  
    Yep, E. (27 September 2011), "ReNew Wind Power Gets $201 Million Goldman Investment", Wall Street Journal, The Wall Street Journal, retrieved 27 September  2011  
    Indian IT-BPO Industry, NASSCOM, 2011–2012, archived from the original on 9 May 2012, retrieved 22 June  2012  
    UNDERSTANDING THE WTO: THE ORGANIZATION Members and Observers, WTO, 1995, archived from the original on 29 December 2009, retrieved 23 June  2012  

Demographics

    Bonner, A. (1990), Averting the Apocalypse: Social Movements in India Today, Duke University Press, ISBN 978-0-8223-1048-8, retrieved 24 July  2011  
    Healthcare in India: Report Highlights (PDF) , Boston Analytics, January 2009, archived from the original (PDF)  on 28 July 2011, retrieved 23 July  2011  
    Dev, S. M.; Rao, N. C. (2009), India: Perspectives on Equitable Development, Academic Foundation, ISBN 978-81-7188-685-2 
    Dharwadker, A. (28 October 2010), "Representing India's Pasts: Time, Culture, and Problems of Performance Historiography", in Canning, C. M.; Postlewait, T. (eds.), Representing the Past: Essays in Performance Historiography, University of Iowa Press, ISBN 978-1-58729-905-6, retrieved 24 July  2011  
    Drèze, J.; Goyal, A. (9 February 2009), "The Future of Mid-Day Meals", in Baru, R. V. (ed.), School Health Services in India: The Social and Economic Contexts, SAGE Publications, ISBN 978-81-7829-873-3 
    Dyson, T.; Visaria, P. (7 July 2005), "Migration and Urbanisation: Retrospect and Prospects", in Dyson, T.; Casses, R.; Visaria, L. (eds.), Twenty-First Century India: Population, Economy, Human Development, and the Environment, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-928382-8 
    Garg, S. C. (19 April 2005), Mobilizing Urban Infrastructure Finance in India (PDF) , World Bank, archived from the original (PDF)  on 24 August 2009, retrieved 27 January  2010  
    Mallikarjun, B (November 2004), "Fifty Years of Language Planning for Modern Hindi – The Official Language of India", Language in India, 4 (11), ISSN 1930-2940, retrieved 24 July  2011  
    Notification No. 2/8/60-O.L, Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, 27 April 1960, archived from the original on 1 October 2014, retrieved 13 May  2011  
    "Religious Composition", Office of the Registrar General and Census Commissioner, Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, 2010–2011, retrieved 23 July  2011  
    "Census Data 2001", Office of the Registrar General and Census Commissioner, Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, 2010–2011, retrieved 22 July  2011  
    Ottenheimer, H. J. (2008), The Anthropology of Language: An Introduction to Linguistic Anthropology, Cengage, ISBN 978-0-495-50884-7 
    Ratna, U. (2007), "Interface Between Urban and Rural Development in India", in Dutt, A. K.; Thakur, B (eds.), City, Society, and Planning, 1, Concept, ISBN 978-81-8069-459-2 
    Robinson, S. (1 May 2008), "India's Medical Emergency", Time, retrieved 23 July  2011  
    Rorabacher, J. A. (2010), Hunger and Poverty in South Asia, Gyan, ISBN 978-81-212-1027-0 
    Country Cooperation Strategy: India (PDF) , World Health Organization, November 2006, retrieved 23 July  2011  
    Chandramouli, C. (15 July 2011), Rural Urban Distribution of Population (PDF) , Ministry of Home Affairs (India), retrieved 24 January  2015  

Culture

    Agnivesh, Swami; Rama Mani; Angelika Köster-Lossack (25 November 2005). "Missing: 50 million Indian girls". New York Times. Retrieved 30 December  2013 . 
    Bunting, Madeleine (22 July 2011). "India's missing women". The Guardian. Retrieved 30 December  2013 . 
    Binmore, K. G. (27 March 2007), Playing for Real: A Text on Game Theory, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-530057-4 
    Bladholm, L. (12 August 2000), The Indian Grocery Store Demystified (1st ed.), Macmillan Publishers, ISBN 978-1-58063-143-3 
    "Saina Nehwal: India's Badminton Star and "New Woman" ", BBC News, 1 August 2010, retrieved 5 October  2010  
    "Commonwealth Games 2010: India Dominate Shooting Medals", BBC News, 7 October 2010, retrieved 3 June  2011  
    Chopra, P. (18 March 2011), A Joint Enterprise: Indian Elites and the Making of British Bombay, University of Minnesota Press, ISBN 978-0-8166-7037-6 
    Cullen-Dupont, K. (July 2009), Human Trafficking (1st ed.), Infobase Publishing, ISBN 978-0-8160-7545-4 
    Das, S. K. (1 January 2005), A History of Indian Literature, 500–1399: From Courtly to the Popular, Sahitya Akademi, ISBN 978-81-260-2171-0 
    Datta, A. (2006), The Encyclopaedia of Indian Literature, 2, Sahitya Akademi, ISBN 978-81-260-1194-0 
    Dehejia, R. S. (7 November 2011), "Indian Grand Prix Vs. Encephalitis?", The Wall Street Journal, retrieved 20 December  2011  
    Deutsch, E. (30 April 1969), Advaita Vedānta: A Philosophical Reconstruction, University of Hawaii Press, ISBN 978-0-8248-0271-4 
    Dissanayake, W. K.; Gokulsing, M. (May 2004), Indian Popular Cinema: A Narrative of Cultural Change (2nd ed.), Trentham Books, ISBN 978-1-85856-329-9 
    Southern Movies Account for over 75% of Film Revenues, The Economic Times, 18 November 2009, retrieved 18 June  2011  
    "South Asian Arts: Indian Dance", Encyclopædia Britannica, retrieved 17 July  2011  
    "Tamil Literature", Encyclopædia Britannica, 2008, retrieved 24 July  2011  
    Eraly, A. (2008), India, Penguin Books, ISBN 978-0-7566-4952-4, retrieved 24 July  2011  
    Hart, G. L. (August 1975), Poems of Ancient Tamil: Their Milieu and Their Sanskrit Counterparts (1st ed.), University of California Press, ISBN 978-0-520-02672-8 
    Heehs, P., ed. (1 September 2002), Indian Religions: A Historical Reader of Spiritual Expression and Experience, New York University Press, ISBN 978-0-8147-3650-0, retrieved 24 July  2011  
    Henderson, C. E. (2002), Culture and Customs of India, Greenwood Publishing Group, ISBN 978-0-313-30513-9 
    Hoiberg, D.; Ramchandani, I. (2000), Students' Britannica India: Select Essays, Popular Prakashan, ISBN 978-0-85229-762-9 
    Johnson, W. J., ed. (1 September 2008), The Sauptikaparvan of the Mahabharata: The Massacre at Night, Oxford World's Classics (2nd ed.), Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-282361-8 
    Jones, G.; Ramdas, K. (2005), (Un)tying the Knot: Ideal and Reality in Asian Marriage, National University of Singapore Press, ISBN 978-981-05-1428-0 
    Kālidāsa; Johnson, W. J. (15 November 2001), The Recognition of Śakuntalā: A Play in Seven Acts, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-283911-4 
    Kaminsky, Arnold P.; Long, Roger D. (30 September 2011), India Today: An Encyclopedia of Life in the Republic: An Encyclopedia of Life in the Republic, ABC-CLIO, ISBN 978-0-313-37462-3, retrieved 12 September  2012  
    Karanth, S. K. (October 2002), Yakṣagāna, Abhinav Publications, ISBN 978-81-7017-357-1 
    Kiple, K. F.; Ornelas, K. C., eds. (2000), The Cambridge World History of Food, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-40216-3 
    Kuiper, K., ed. (1 July 2010), The Culture of India, Britannica Educational Publishing, ISBN 978-1-61530-203-1, retrieved 24 July  2011  
    Kumar, V. (January 2000), Vastushastra, All You Wanted to Know About Series (2nd ed.), Sterling Publishing, ISBN 978-81-207-2199-9 
    Lal, A. (2004), The Oxford Companion to Indian Theatre, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-564446-3, retrieved 24 July  2011  
    Lang, J.; Moleski, W. (1 December 2010), Functionalism Revisited, Ashgate Publishing, ISBN 978-1-4094-0701-0 
    MacDonell, A. A. (2004), A History of Sanskrit Literature  , Kessinger Publishing, ISBN 978-1-4179-0619-2 
    Majumdar, B.; Bandyopadhyay, K. (2006), A Social History of Indian Football: Striving To Score, Routledge, ISBN 978-0-415-34835-5 
    Makar, E. M. (2007), An American's Guide to Doing Business in India, Adams, ISBN 978-1-59869-211-2 
    Massey, R.; Massey, J (1998), The Music of India, Abhinav Publications, ISBN 978-81-7017-332-8 
    Medora, N. (2003), "Mate Selection in Contemporary India: Love Marriages Versus Arranged Marriages", in Hamon, R. R.; Ingoldsby, B. B. (eds.), Mate Selection Across Cultures, SAGE Publications, pp. 209–230, ISBN 978-0-7619-2592-7 
    Messner, W. (2009), Working with India. The Softer Aspects of a Successful Collaboration with the Indian IT & BPO Industry, Springer, ISBN 978-3-540-89077-5 
    Messner, W. (2012), Engaging with India. How to Manage the Softer Aspects of a Global Collaboration, Createspace, ISBN 978-1-4662-4490-0 
    "Indian Readership Survey 2012 Q1 : Topline Findings" (PDF) . Media Research Users Council. Growth: Literacy & Media Consumption. Archived from the original (PDF)  on 7 April 2014. Retrieved 12 September  2012 . 
    Mehta, Nalin (30 July 2008), Television in India: Satellites, Politics and Cultural Change, Taylor & Francis US, ISBN 978-0-415-44759-1, retrieved 12 September  2012  
    Is Boxing the New Cricket?, Mint, 24 September 2010, retrieved 5 October  2010  
    Nakamura, H. (1 April 1999), Indian Buddhism: A Survey with Bibliographical Notes, Buddhist Tradition Series (12th ed.), Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-81-208-0272-8 
    Puskar-Pasewicz, M. (16 September 2010), Cultural Encyclopedia of Vegetarianism, Greenwood Publishing Group, ISBN 978-0-313-37556-9 
    Raghavan, S. (23 October 2006), Handbook of Spices, Seasonings, and Flavorings (2nd ed.), CRC Press, ISBN 978-0-8493-2842-8 
    Raichlen, S. (10 May 2011), "A Tandoor Oven Brings India's Heat to the Backyard", The New York Times, retrieved 14 June  2011  
    Rajadhyaksha, A.; Willemen, P., eds. (22 January 1999), Encyclopaedia of Indian Cinema (2nd ed.), British Film Institute, ISBN 978-0-85170-669-6 
    Ramanujan, A. K. (translator) (15 October 1985), Poems of Love and War: From the Eight Anthologies and the Ten Long Poems of Classical Tamil, New York: Columbia University Press, pp. ix–x, ISBN 978-0-231-05107-1 
    Rawat, Ramnarayan S (23 March 2011), Reconsidering Untouchability: Chamars and Dalit History in North India, Indiana University Press, ISBN 978-0-253-22262-6 
    Anand Crowned World Champion, Rediff, 29 October 2008, retrieved 29 October  2008  
    Roberts, N. W. (12 July 2004), Building Type Basics for Places of Worship (1st ed.), John Wiley & Sons, ISBN 978-0-471-22568-3 
    Schoenhals, M. (22 November 2003), Intimate Exclusion: Race and Caste Turned Inside Out, University Press of America, ISBN 978-0-7618-2697-2 
    Schwartzberg, J. (2011), "India: Caste", Encyclopædia Britannica, retrieved 17 July  2011  
    Sen, A. (5 September 2006), The Argumentative Indian: Writings on Indian History, Culture, and Identity (1st ed.), Picador, ISBN 978-0-312-42602-6 
    Seymour, S.C. (28 January 1999), Women, Family, and Child Care in India: A World in Transition, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-59884-2 
    Silverman, S. (10 October 2007), Vastu: Transcendental Home Design in Harmony with Nature, Gibbs Smith, ISBN 978-1-4236-0132-6 
    Tarlo, E. (1 September 1996), Clothing Matters: Dress and Identity in India (1st ed.), University of Chicago Press, ISBN 978-0-226-78976-7, retrieved 24 July  2011  
    Sawant Shoots Historic Gold at World Championships, The Times of India, 9 August 2010, retrieved 25 May  2011  
    Taj Mahal, United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organisation, retrieved 3 March  2012  
    India Aims for Center Court, The Wall Street Journal, 11 September 2009, retrieved 29 September  2010  
    Wengell, D. L.; Gabriel, N. (1 September 2008), Educational Opportunities in Integrative Medicine: The A-to-Z Healing Arts Guide and Professional Resource Directory (1st ed.), The Hunter Press, ISBN 978-0-9776552-4-3 
    Intergenerational Mobility for Dalits Is Visible, Albeit Limited (PDF) . World Bank Report 2011. 2011. doi:10.1596/978-0-8213-8689-7. ISBN 978-0-8213-8689-7. Retrieved 6 September  2012 . 
    Xavier, L. (12 September 2010), Sushil Kumar Wins Gold in World Wrestling Championship, The Times of India, retrieved 5 October  2010  
    Yadav, S. S.; McNeil, D.; Stevenson, P. C. (23 October 2007), Lentil: An Ancient Crop for Modern Times, Springer, ISBN 978-1-4020-6312-1 
    Zvelebil, K. V. (1 August 1997), Companion Studies to the History of Tamil Literature, Brill Publishers, ISBN 978-90-04-09365-2 

External links 
Indiaat Wikipedia's sister projects 

     Definitions from Wiktionary 
     Media from Wikimedia Commons 
     News from Wikinews 
     Quotations from Wikiquote 
     Texts from Wikisource 
     Textbooks from Wikibooks 
     Travel guide from Wikivoyage 
     Resources from Wikiversity 

Government

    Official website of Government of India
    Government of India Web Directory

General information

    "India". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. 
    India at Curlie
    India from UCB Libraries GovPubs
    India from the BBC News
    Indian State district block village website
    Wikimedia Atlas of India
    Geographic data related to India at OpenStreetMap
    Key Development Forecasts for India from International Futures

    v
    t
    e

  India  topics
History
Overviews

    Timeline
    Years

    Astronomy
    Economics
    Linguistics
    Maritime
    Mathematics
    Metallurgy
    Military
    Postal
    Science and technology

Pre-colonial

    Stone Age
    Indus Valley Civilization
    Vedic period
    Mahajanapadas
    Mauryas
    Middle kingdoms
    Hoysala
    Chola
    Pala
    Kakatiya
    Delhi Sultanate
    Vijayanagara
    Mughals
    Marathas
    European trade

    Colonial
    Princely

    East India Company
    Plassey
    1857 rebellion
    British Raj
    Railways
    Economy
    Army
    Zamindari
    Bengali Renaissance
    Political reforms
    Princely states
    Partition of Bengal
    Independence movement
    1943 famine
    World War II
    Partition

Republic

    Integration
    Non-Aligned Movement
    Five-Year Plans
    Sino-Indian War
    Indo-Pakistani wars
    Green Revolution
    White Revolution
    Naxal Insurgency
    Smiling Buddha
    Space programme
    The Emergency
    Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF)
    Economic liberalisation
    Pokhran-II

Geography
Environment

    Biosphere reserves
    Climate
        Climatic regions
    Earthquakes
    Ecoregions
    Environmental issues
    Fauna
    Flora
    Geology
    National parks
    Protected areas
    Wildlife
    sanctuaries

Landforms

    Beaches
    Desert
    Extreme points
    Glaciers
    Islands
    Lakes
    Mountains
    Plains
        Indo-Gangetic
        Eastern coastal
        Western coastal
    Rivers
    Valleys
    Volcanoes
    Waterfalls

Regions

    East
    North
    Northeast
    South
    West

Subdivisions

    Autonomous administrative divisions
    Cities
    Districts
    Municipalities
    States and territories

Politics
Government

    Agencies
    Energy policy
    Foreign relations
    Parliament
    President
    Vice President
    Prime Minister
    Union Council of Ministers
    Civil Services
    Cabinet Secretary
    State governments

Law

    Chief Justice
    Constitution
    District Courts
    Fundamental rights, principles and duties
    High Courts
    Human rights
    Supreme Court

Enforcement
Federal

    Border Security Force (BSF)
    Central Industrial Security Force (CISF)
    Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF)
    Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP)
    National Security Guard (NSG)
    Railway Protection Force (RPF)
    Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB)
    Special Protection Group (SPG)

Intelligence

    Bureau of Police Research and Development (BPR&D)
    Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI)
    Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI)
    Enforcement Directorate
    Intelligence Bureau (IB)
    Joint Intelligence Committee (JIC)
    Narcotics Control Bureau (NCB)
    National Investigation Agency (NIA)
    Research and Analysis Wing (R&AW)

Military

    Army
    Navy
    Air Force

Politics

    Censorship
    Elections
    Nationalism
    Parliament
        Lok Sabha
        Rajya Sabha
    Political parties
        INC
        BJP
        BSP
        CPI
        CPM
        NCP
    Reservations
    Scandals
    Scheduled groups
    Secularism

Economy
Companies

    BSE SENSEX
    CNX Nifty
    Government-owned companies
    List of companies

Governance

    Ministry of Finance
        Finance ministers
    Ministry of Commerce and Industry
        Commerce ministers
    Finance Commission
    Planning Commission
    Economic Advisory Council
    Central Statistical Office
    Securities and Exchange Board of India
    Enforcement Directorate
    Foreign trade
    Remittances
    Taxation
    Subsidies
    Industrial licensing
    Voluntary guidelines
    NITI Aayog
    Make in India
    FDI in India

Currency

    Indian rupee
        History
        Historical exchange rates data of the Indian rupee
        Coinage
    Reserve Bank of India
        Governors
    India Government Mint

Financial services

    Banking
        Banks
    Insurance
    Foreign exchange reserves
    Bombay Stock Exchange
    National Stock Exchange
    Multi Commodity Exchange
    Bullion
    Black money

History

    Economic Development
    Economic liberalisation
    Licence Raj
    Green revolution
    Government initiatives
    Numbering system

People

    Billionaires
    Businesspeople
    Demography
    Income
        Poverty
    Labour law
    Pensions
        EPFO
        NPS
        PPF

States

    Andhra Pradesh
    Assam
    Bihar
    Goa
    Gujarat
    Haryana
    Himachal Pradesh
    Jammu and Kashmir
    Karnataka
    Kerala
    Madhya Pradesh
    Maharashtra
    Manipur
    Mizoram
    Nagaland
    Odisha
    Punjab
    Rajasthan
    Tamil Nadu
    Telangana
    Uttarakhand
    Uttar Pradesh
    West Bengal

Sectors

    Agriculture
        Livestock
        Fishing
    Automotive
    Defence
    Construction
    Education
    Energy
        Nuclear
        Solar
        Wind
    Entertainment
    Forestry
    Gambling
    Healthcare
    Information technology
    Media
        Cinema
        Television
        Printing
    Mining
    Pharmaceuticals
    Retail
    Science and technology
        Biotechnology
    Telecommunications
    Textiles
    Tourism
    Transport
        Aviation
            Civil
        Ports
        Rail
    Utilities
        Electricity
        Water

    Society
    Culture

Society

    Caste system
    Corruption
    Demographics
    Women
    Education
        Universities in India
        Medical colleges in India
        Law colleges in India
        Engineering colleges in India
    Ethnic relations
    Healthcare
        Hospitals in India
    Languages
    Literacy
    Poverty
    Prisons
    Religion
    Socio-economic issues
    Standard of living
    Water supply and sanitation
    Sexuality
    Crime

Culture

    Arts and entertainment
    Architecture
    Blogging
    Cinema
    Comics
        Webcomics
    Cuisine
        wine
    Dance
    Dress
    Folklore
    Festivals
    Literature
    Media
        television
    Martial arts
    Music
    Public holidays
    Sport

    [Image: Indian Spices.jpg]   Indian cuisine portal

Related topics

    v
    t
    e

States and union territories of India
States

    Arunachal Pradesh
    Andhra Pradesh
    Assam
    Bihar
    Chhattisgarh
    Goa
    Gujarat
    Haryana
    Himachal Pradesh
    Jammu and Kashmir
    Jharkhand
    Karnataka
    Kerala
    Madhya Pradesh
    Maharashtra
    Manipur
    Meghalaya
    Mizoram
    Nagaland
    Odisha
    Punjab
    Rajasthan
    Sikkim
    Tamil Nadu
    Telangana
    Tripura
    Uttar Pradesh
    Uttarakhand
    West Bengal

Union Territories

    Andaman and Nicobar Islands
    Chandigarh
    Dadra and Nagar Haveli
    National Capital Territory of Delhi
    Daman and Diu
    Lakshadweep
    Puducherry

    Capitals in India
    Proposed states and territories
    Historical Regions
    British Provinces

    v
    t
    e

Members of the Commonwealth of Nations
Sovereign states
(Members)

    Antigua and Barbuda
    Australia
    Bahamas
    Bangladesh
    Barbados
    Belize
    Botswana
    Brunei
    Cameroon
    Canada
    Cyprus
    Dominica
    Eswatini (Swaziland)
    Fiji
    The Gambia
    Ghana
    Grenada
    Guyana
    India
    Jamaica
    Kenya
    Kiribati
    Lesotho
    Malawi
    Malaysia
    Malta
    Mauritius
    Mozambique
    Namibia
    Nauru
    New Zealand
    Nigeria
    Pakistan
    Papua New Guinea
    Rwanda
    St. Kitts and Nevis
    St. Lucia
    St. Vincent and the Grenadines
    Samoa
    Seychelles
    Sierra Leone
    Singapore
    Solomon Islands
    South Africa
    Sri Lanka
    Tanzania
    Tonga
    Trinidad and Tobago
    Tuvalu
    Uganda
    United Kingdom
    Vanuatu
    Zambia

Dependencies
of Members
Australia

    Ashmore and Cartier Islands
    Australian Antarctic Territory
    Christmas Island
    Cocos (Keeling) Islands
    Coral Sea Islands
    Heard Island and McDonald Islands
    Norfolk Island

New Zealand

    Cook Islands
    Niue
    Ross Dependency
    Tokelau

United Kingdom

    Akrotiri and Dhekelia
    Anguilla
    Bermuda
    British Antarctic Territory
    British Indian Ocean Territory
    British Virgin Islands
    Cayman Islands
    Falkland Islands
    Gibraltar
    Guernsey
    Isle of Man
    Jersey
    Montserrat
    Pitcairn Islands
    St. Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha
    South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
    Turks and Caicos Islands

Source: Commonwealth Secretariat - Member States

    v
    t
    e

South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC)
Agreements
South Asian Free Trade Area
Summits

    Dhaka 1985
    Bangalore 1986
    Kathmandu 1987
    Islamabad 1988
    Malé 1990
    Colombo 1991
    Dhaka 1993
    New Delhi 1995
    Malé 1997
    Colombo 1998
    Kathmandu 2002
    Islamabad 2004
    Dhaka 2005
    New Delhi 2007
    Colombo 2008
    Thimphu 2010
    Addu 2011
    Kathmandu 2014
    Islamabad 2016 (Cancelled)
    Next

Members

      Afghanistan
      Bangladesh
      Bhutan
      India
      Maldives
        Nepal
      Pakistan
      Sri Lanka

Observers

      Australia
      China
      European Union
      Iran
      Japan
      Mauritius
      Myanmar
      South Korea
      United States

Guests

      South Africa
      Russia

Specialized agencies

    SAARC Consortium on Open and Distance Learning
    SAARC Documentation Centre
    South Asia Co-operative Environment Programme
    Foundation of SAARC Writers and Literature
    SAARC Chamber of Commerce and Industry
    South Asian Federation of Accountants

Related Articles

    SAARC Secretary General
    SAARC Secretariat
    SAARC satellite
    South Asian University
    South Asian Games
    SAARC Literary Award
    SAARC Road
    SAARC Fountain

    v
    t
    e

Group of Eight (G8) and Group of Eight + Five (G8+5)
G8 members

      Canada
      France
      Germany
      Italy
      Japan
      Russia (suspended)
      United Kingdom
      United States

Representative

      European Union

G8+5

      Brazil
      China
      India
      Mexico
      South Africa

See also

    Group of Six
    Group of Seven
    G7+1

    v
    t
    e

G20 major economies

    [Image: Argentina]    Argentina
    [Image: Australia]    Australia
    [Image: Brazil]    Brazil
    [Image: Canada]    Canada
    [Image: China]    China
    [Image: European Union]    European Union
    [Image: France]    France
    [Image: Germany]    Germany
    [Image: India]    India
    [Image: Indonesia]    Indonesia
    [Image: Italy]    Italy
    [Image: Japan]    Japan
    [Image: Mexico]    Mexico
    [Image: Russia]    Russia
    [Image: Saudi Arabia]    Saudi Arabia
    [Image: South Africa]    South Africa
    [Image: South Korea]    Republic of Korea
    [Image: Turkey]    Turkey
    [Image: United Kingdom]    United Kingdom
    [Image: United States]    United States

    v
    t
    e

BRICS
Membership

    [Image: Brazil]    Brazil
    [Image: Russia]    Russia
    [Image: India]    India
    [Image: China]    China
    [Image: South Africa]    South Africa

Summits

    Yekaterinburg 2009
    Brasília 2010
    Sanya 2011
    New Delhi 2012
    Durban 2013
    Fortaleza 2014
    Ufa 2015
    Goa 2016
    Xiamen 2017
    Johannesburg 2018
    Brasília 2019
    Saint Petersburg 2020

Bilateral relations

    Brazil–China
    Brazil–India
    Brazil–Russia
    Brazil–South Africa
    China–India
    China–Russia
    China–South Africa
    India–Russia
    India–South Africa
    Russia–South Africa

Leaders

      Bolsonaro
      Putin
      Modi
      Xi
      Ramaphosa

Related

    New Development Bank
    BRICS Contingent Reserve Arrangement
    BRICS Leaders
    BRICS Cable
    BRICS Universities League

BRICS U-17 Football Cup

    2016 Goa
    2018 Johannesburg

    v
    t
    e

BIMSTEC
BIMSTEC members

      Bangladesh
      India
      Myanmar
      Sri Lanka
      Thailand
        Nepal
      Bhutan

Summits

    1st BIMSTEC summit

Bilateral relations

    Bangladesh–India
    Bangladesh–Myanmar
    Bangladesh–Sri Lanka
    Bangladesh–Thailand
    Bangladesh–Nepal
    Bangladesh–Bhutan
    India–Myanmar
    India–Sri Lanka
    India–Thailand
    India–Nepal
    Bhutan–India
    Myanmar–Thailand
    Bhutan–Thailand

Leaders

      Sheikh Hasina
      Narendra Modi
      Win Myint
      Ranil Wickremesinghe
      Prayut Chan-o-cha
      Khadga Prasad Sharma Oli
      Lotay Tshering

    v
    t
    e

East Asia Summit (EAS)

    First
    Second
    Third
    Fourth
    Fifth
    Sixth
    Seventh
    Eighth
    Ninth
    Tenth
    Eleventh
    Twelfth
    Thirteenth

      Australia
      Brunei
      Cambodia
      China
      India
      Indonesia
      Japan
      Laos
      Malaysia
      Myanmar
      New Zealand
      Philippines
      Russia
      Singapore
      South Korea
      Thailand
      United States
      Vietnam

    v
    t
    e

Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO)
Summits

    Beijing 2012
    Dushanbe 2014
    Astana 2017

Member states

    China
    India
    Kazakhstan
    Kyrgyzstan
    Pakistan
    Russia
    Tajikistan
    Uzbekistan

Observer states

    Afghanistan
    Belarus
    Iran
    Mongolia

Dialogue partners

    Armenia
    Azerbaijan
    Cambodia
    Nepal
    Sri Lanka
    Turkey

Guests

    ASEAN
    CIS
    Turkmenistan

See also

    Member states
    Eurasian Land Bridge
    Three Evils
    Working languages
        Chinese
        Russian

Geographic locale

    v
    t
    e

Countries and dependencies of Asia
Sovereign states

    Afghanistan
    Armenia
    Azerbaijan
    Bahrain
    Bangladesh
    Bhutan
    Brunei
    Cambodia
    China
    Cyprus
    Egypt
    Georgia
    India
    Indonesia
    Iran
    Iraq
    Israel
    Japan
    Jordan
    Kazakhstan
    North Korea
    South Korea
    Kuwait
    Kyrgyzstan
    Laos
    Lebanon
    Malaysia
    Maldives
    Mongolia
    Myanmar
    Nepal
    Oman
    Pakistan
    Philippines
    Qatar
    Russia
    Saudi Arabia
    Singapore
    Sri Lanka
    Syria
    Tajikistan
    Thailand
    East Timor (Timor-Leste)
    Turkey
    Turkmenistan
    United Arab Emirates
    Uzbekistan
    Vietnam
    Yemen

[Image: Asia (orthographic projection).svg]  
States with limited recognition

    Abkhazia
    Artsakh
    Northern Cyprus
    Palestine
    South Ossetia
    Taiwan

Dependencies and  special
administrative regions
Australia

    Christmas Island
    Cocos (Keeling) Islands

China

    Hong Kong
    Macau

United Kingdom

    Akrotiri and Dhekelia
    British Indian Ocean Territory

    [Image: Wikipedia book]   Book
    [Image: Category]   Category
    [Image: Portal]   Asia portal

Authority control [Image: Edit this at Wikidata]  

    BNE: XX451208  
    BNF: cb11934238p (data)  
    GND: 4026722-2  
    HDS: 3407  
    ISNI: 0000 0001 2331 2734  
    LCCN: n80125948  
    MusicBrainz: d31a9a15-537f-3669-ad53-25753ddd2772  
    NARA: 10044481  
    NDL: 00564071  
    NKC: ge129384  
    NLA: 35219734  
    NLI: 000981378  
    RERO: 02-A016967921  
    SELIBR: 148745  
    SUDOC: 080728499  
    VIAF: 135375457  
    WorldCat Identities (via VIAF): 135375457 

Coordinates: 21°N  78°E   ﻿ / ﻿ 21°N 78°E ﻿ / 21; 78      

Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=India&oldid=908644559"
Categories:

    India
    BRICS nations
    Commonwealth republics
    English-speaking countries and territories
    Federal republics
    E7 nations
    G15 nations
    G20 nations
    Hindustani-speaking countries and territories
    Member states of the Commonwealth of Nations
    Member states of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
    Member states of the United Nations
    South Asian countries
    States and territories established in 1947
    Countries in Asia

Hidden categories:

    CS1 Hindi-language sources (hi)
    CS1 maint: Multiple names: editors list
    Webarchive template wayback links
    Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages
    Wikipedia pages under 30-500 editing restriction
    Articles with short description
    Use dmy dates from July 2019
    Use Indian English from June 2016
    All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English
    Articles containing Sanskrit-language text
    Articles containing Bengali-language text
    Pages using collapsible list with both background and text-align in titlestyle
    Pages using infobox country or infobox former country with the symbol caption or type parameters
    Articles with hAudio microformats
    Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2012
    All articles containing potentially dated statements
    Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2016
    Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2010
    Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2009
    Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2001
    Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2005
    CS1: long volume value
    Articles with Curlie links
    Wikipedia articles with BNE identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with HDS identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with ISNI identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with MusicBrainz area identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with NARA identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with NKC identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with NLA identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with NLI identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with RERO identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with SUDOC identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers
    Wikipedia articles with WorldCat-VIAF identifiers
    AC with 16 elements
    Coordinates on Wikidata
    Featured articles
    Articles containing video clips
    Articles containing image maps

Navigation menu
Personal tools

    Not logged in
    Talk
    Contributions
    Create account
    Log in

Namespaces

    Article 
    Talk 

Variants 

Views

    Read 
    View source 
    View history 

More 

Search
Navigation

    Main page
    Contents
    Featured content
    Current events
    Random article
    Donate to Wikipedia
    Wikipedia store

Interaction

    Help
    About Wikipedia
    Community portal
    Recent changes
    Contact page

Tools

    What links here
    Related changes
    Upload file
    Special pages
    Permanent link
    Page information
    Wikidata item
    Cite this page

In other projects

    Wikimedia Commons
    Wikinews
    Wikiquote
    Wikivoyage

Print/export

    Create a book
    Download as PDF
    Printable version

Languages

    Acèh
    Адыгэбзэ
    Адыгабзэ
    Afrikaans
    Akan
    Alemannisch
    አማርኛ
    Ænglisc
    العربية
    Aragonés
    ܐܪܡܝܐ
    Armãneashti
    Arpetan
    অসমীয়া
    Asturianu
    Avañe'ẽ
    Авар
    Aymar aru
    Azərbaycanca
    تۆرکجه
    বাংলা
    Bahasa Banjar
    B'n-l'm-gú
    Basa Banyumasan
    Башҡортса
    Беларуская
    Беларуская (тарашкевіца)‎
    भोजपुरी
    Bikol Central
    Bislama
    Български
    Boarisch
    བོད་ཡིག
    Bosanski
    Brezhoneg
    Буряад
    Català
    Чӑвашла
    Cebuano
    Čeština
    Chamoru
    Chavacano de Zamboanga
    Chi-Chewa
    ChiShona
    ChiTumbuka
    Corsu
    Cymraeg
    Dansk
    Davvisámegiella
    Deitsch
    Deutsch
    ދިވެހިބަސް
    Diné bizaad
    Dolnoserbski
    डोटेली
    ཇོང་ཁ
    Eesti
    Ελληνικά
    Эрзянь
    Español
    Esperanto
    Estremeñu
    Euskara
    Eʋegbe
    فارسی
    Fiji Hindi
    Føroyskt
    Français
    Frysk
    Furlan
    Gaeilge
    Gaelg
    Gagauz
    Gàidhlig
    Galego
    ГӀалгӀай
    贛語
    Gĩkũyũ
    گیلکی
    ગુજરાતી
    𐌲𐌿𐍄𐌹𐍃𐌺
    गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni
    客家語/Hak-k'-ngî
    Хальмг
    한국어
    Hausa
    Hawaiʻi
    Հայերեն
    Արեւմտահայերէն
    हिन्दी
    Hornjoserbsce
    Hrvatski
    Ido
    Igbo
    Ilokano
    বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী
    Bahasa Indonesia
    Interlingua
    Interlingue
    ᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ/inuktitut
    Ирон
    IsiXhosa
    IsiZulu
    Íslenska
    Italiano
    עברית
    Jawa
    Kabɩyɛ
    Kalaallisut
    ಕನ್ನಡ
    Kapampangan
    Къарачай-малкъар
    ქართული
    कॉशुर / کٲشُر
    Kaszëbsczi
    Қазақша
    Kernowek
    Kinyarwanda
    Kirundi
    Kiswahili
    Коми
    Kongo
    Kreyòl ayisyen
    Kurdî
    Кыргызча
    Ladino
    Лакку
    ລາວ
    لۊری شومالی
    Latgaļu
    Latina
    Latviešu
    Lëtzebuergesch
    Лезги
    Lietuvių
    Ligure
    Limburgs
    Lingála
    Lingua Franca Nova
    Livvinkarjala
    La .lojban.
    Lumbaart
    Magyar
    मैथिली
    Македонски
    Malagasy
    മലയാളം
    Malti
    Māori
    मराठी
    მარგალური
    مصرى
    مازِرونی
    Bahasa Melayu
    Minangkabau
    Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄
    Mirandés
    Мокшень
    Монгол
    မြန်မာဘာသာ
    Nāhuatl
    Dorerin Naoero
    Nederlands
    Nedersaksies
    नेपाली
    नेपाल भाषा
    日本語
    Napulitano
    Нохчийн
    Nordfriisk
    Norfuk / Pitkern
    Norsk
    Norsk nynorsk
    Nouormand
    Novial
    Occitan
    Олык марий
    ଓଡ଼ିଆ
    Oromoo
    Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча
    ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
    पालि
    پنجابی
    Papiamentu
    پښتو
    Patois
    ភាសាខ្មែរ
    Picard
    Piemontèis
    Tok Pisin
    Plattdüütsch
    Polski
    Português
    Qaraqalpaqsha
    Qırımtatarca
    Reo tahiti
    Rom'nă
    Romani čhib
    Rumantsch
    Runa Simi
    Русиньскый
    Русский
    Саха тыла
    ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ
    Gagana Samoa
    संस्कृतम्
    Sängö
    Sardu
    Scots
    Seeltersk
    Sesotho
    Sesotho sa Leboa
    Shqip
    Sicilianu
    සිංහල
    Simple English
    سنڌي
    SiSwati
    Slovenčina
    Slovenščina
    Ślůnski
    Soomaaliga
    کوردی
    Sranantongo
    Српски / srpski
    Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
    ၽႃႇသႃႇတႆး
    Basa Sunda
    Suomi
    Svenska
    Tagalog
    தமிழ்
    Taqbaylit
    Tarandíne
    Татарча/tatarça
    తెలుగు
    Tetun
    ไทย
    ትግርኛ
    Тоҷикӣ
    Lea faka-Tonga
    ᏣᎳᎩ
    ತುಳು
    Türkçe
    Türkmençe
    Twi
    Thuɔŋjäŋ
    Удмурт
    ᨅᨔ ᨕᨘᨁᨗ
    Українська
    اردو
    ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche
    Vahcuengh
    Vèneto
    Vepsän kel’
    Tiếng Việt
    Volapük
    Võro
    Walon
    文言
    West-Vlams
    Winaray
    Wolof
    吴语
    Xitsonga
    ייִדיש
    Yorùbá
    粵語
    Zazaki
    Zeêuws
    Žemaitėška
    中文

Edit links 

    This page was last edited on 31 July 2019, at 01:46 (UTC) .
    Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

    Privacy policy
    About Wikipedia
    Disclaimers
    Contact Wikipedia
    Developers
    Cookie statement
    Mobile view

    [Image: Wikimedia Foundation]  	
    [Image: Powered by MediaWiki]  	



Textise: Back to top
This text-only page was created by Textise (www.textise.net) © Textise - CPC LLC
To find out more about our product, visit Textise.org.
